This is the timer class I talked about in terms of instrumenting
your code,
adding code to your code to measure your code.
So this is pretty straightforward.
It works like a stopwatch.
Here you see it in action. Line 26, we declare a timer of
this type.
Line 27,
we start it. Line 28, we run some code that
we want to time.
Line 29,
then we stop the stopwatch, which has the effect of
marking the time that it took for what happened between the
start and stop. So you can see in the next line,
30 and 31,
it prints out what was there in seconds.
One colon means do stuff one.
Here you see another version of it.
We reset the timer and measure a second thing.
So this is a one way to
measure your code. So we are behind
in schedule.
So this is a video that I can have you go check out.
Right?
This is the search demo video. But this is just some
command line code here.
You can get to the code itself right there.
And as you look at it, you can see right here at the top of the
code is that timer class. So it's being used in this
thing.
Then there's a function here that's called linear search.
It looks like a pretty standard linear search there.
We've got some vector of integers and some value that
we're looking for. That's up there.
Then we just run a for loop, go through the entire size.
If the value is what we're looking for,
then we return that index, otherwise return negative 1.
Really vanilla linear search.
There's not really a whole lot of spicy linear searches, by the
way. They're all vanilla.
This is just a linear search.
up next here's a binary search right we've seen a binary search
where we're looking to find the thing in the middle and if the
Val is equal to the thing in the middle then we say we found it
return mid otherwise we modify either the high end or the low
end based on what we found binary search So
this test search function takes
a number of searches to do so this is important to do when
you're testing things empirically is you can't just
test it and measure it once and say well that's how long it took
there's a lot of things that are going on in your computer so you
want to run it a
bunch of times and so this program actually lets you send
in a number and we start with ten thousand one hundred
thousand million two million four million, eight million,
keep making it grow larger because you need to do that to
get some timing on it to measure a trend here.
So this loop,
you'll see this one loops however many number of searches
times you gave it and then it says if you're doing a binary
search call the binary search, if you're doing a linear search
do the linear search.
So at the beginning of the run you just say hey I want to do
10,000 linear searches and it measures them.
10,000 binary searches and it measures them.
That's what this code does sometimes you see sometimes it
finds it looks for a value that's not there so sometimes
doesn't always flock find it that's why it says if binary
search then increment the number of things found it's possible
that you might not find the thing because it doesn't exist
so that's it and then main is pretty straightforward it asks
you for some arguments at the command line and if one of
them's a B then it does a binary search and then it gets the
number of items it's pretty straightforward it fills the
vector but You can see where the timer gets used here, right? So
we start with a timer that gets declared here, right? That's the
second line in main.
Then we have to fill the vector that we're going to search.
So we want to measure that.
We start the timer,
create the vector,
reserve some space in it,
push back a bunch of values,
and then stop the timer.
And then it can tell us how long did it take to fill the vector.
because part of the work that's being done is prep,
and then the other part that we want to measure is how much time
is our algorithm taking, right? So,
if we've got a particularly slow prep,
we don't want to spend a whole lot of time trying to minimize
the time done in the prep when we can't really do that.
If we've got to read some stuff in off a disk or fetch something
off the net,
we can't really make that faster.
When we have the data,
that's where we can start working on it.
So you'll see,
after we've got the vector filled,
we reset the counter,
start it up, and then run that test search function, which is
going to do 1,000 binary searches, or 10,000 linear
searches, or whatever you asked for.
And then we stop it.
Then it can say,
after searching, it took us this much time.
So this is how you can instrument your code.
This is how using some code inside of your code can work.
Remember, obviously,
you can only do this if it's yours.
If you don't have source code, you certainly can't put some
stuff in there to do some testing.
So this is the search demo.
Any questions on this?
So one of the things we do is we run through it.
And here's how you can do this all on the command line,
add cane,
make the search demo, CD in the search demo, Then go grab that
file that I was just looking at right once you've done that Or
you can also download it in your browser, which is what I did to
show on the video here
You can compile it and you run it
So you can do this you see here we start with a million items
To get a number and then try larger numbers two million four
million eight million
Start measuring those things and then you can see a trend right
so you say well in a linear search, every time I double the
number of items I'm searching,
I double the amount of work that I'm doing.
So I would expect that a bunch of runs when I go at a 1 million
should take about half as long as a bunch of runs at 2 million,
about half as much at 4 million, and so on.
And that's what you can see here when you run this.
Then you try it with a binary search.
And the binary search is a bit faster.
But then when you double the items,
it ends up doubling anyway.
So this is kind of what we need to do in our empirical testing
is if you look at this graph on the left, if I just say, well,
So what if I measure 5, 10, 15, and 20 items?
It kind of looks like this, and I might say, well, that's pretty
linear.
But here you can see these are roughly the same 5, 10, and 20
items.
But until I get some of those higher level stuffs up there, I
can't see how that asymptotic is going to play out.
So you're going to want to add larger numbers and do
multiple runs if you're really trying to get some information
from empirical testing.
right?
Then you look at it and say okay now that my empirical testing is
done what did I get versus what did I expect?
What happens if the results I get are worse than I expected?
So I thought maybe it should have been linear and I see some
exponential or some log some some polynomial response.
What happened there?
Usually one of two things right?
I made an error in how I
So there's some hidden loops that I didn't really count on,
some unintended operations, et cetera.
What happens if my results are better than I predicted?
Likely the same two things, really,
right?
Maybe I didn't do the analysis right,
or maybe I coded something different than what I analyzed.
Right? Some other things that could happen, too, though.
I might not have gotten to a worse case,
So I'm measuring and measuring and measuring I never get to the
worst case it doesn't really show me what that worst-case
analysis looks like or Some few things like that and then we get
to the part where you're really gonna be struggling in 281 is
like well what if
My data match.
I think this looks linear, and it was supposed to be linear
quadratic or whatever and
That's what I expected,
but it's still too slow ah
There's very rarely a performance bug, as in I haven't
seen one in 281 ever.
So very rarely it's performance bug.
But you make sure that you got your right compile options on
there because you don't want to be testing your debug builds for
speed. It's kind of a waste of time.
They're not built for speed,
and so you're not going to get really good response out of
them. You can get some relative
response.
So if you run a debug build and measure it, and then you run
another debug build that you've improved,
you should probably see some similar work there.
But if you're really trying to figure out what's going on,
you're going to want to run your release builds,
the dash 03 builds, to do your measurement.
And then we're going to look for optimizations to help us improve
constant factors.
So it turns out in this one, when we run it, We have
this binary search giving
us linear search behavior
in terms of time.
We double the stuff in the binary search, it takes twice as
long.
We double it again, it takes twice as long.
It doesn't do what we would think it would do in a binary
search.
So that's a perfectly good reason to say, Well, I analyzed
it and it looks like a binary search, right?
Anybody see why it's not responding in a logarithmic way
Because this one responds in a linear fashion, yes
Passing the vector by value look at that argument param the
parameter argument
parameter type sorry
Vector of integers named vec
Not a vector by reference a vector by value so every time I
call this and when you say binary search this vector a
thousand times or a million times two million times so a a
million times I copy that vector.
That's the majority of the work.
The binary search,
that's logarithmic,
right? If there's just a thousand items in the container,
that's like 10 steps.
But if a million times I'm copying a thousand items,
I feel the thousand way more than I feel the 10.
So this is an example how you can use
like a runtime analysis to find bugs in your code.
One of the things that you need to do is to be able to write
your stuff for testing so you saw the way that this program
was structured right there was a main function the main function
called some test function after it set things up and the test
function was able to call the functions that I wanted to test.
So then I was able to say, well, start the timer,
run a bunch of tests, and stop the timer, and I can look at
exactly what I want. So when it comes time to start
analyzing your code with measurements,
you have to write your code in such a way that you can measure
what's important.
You can't be like, well, I started at the beginning of main
and turn on the timer, and then when the answer came out,
I hit stop. Well, that's what the autograder
does.
That doesn't help you figure out what part of your code is
running slow right at the high level you could be like start
the timer read the map stop the timer give me some information
you know then search for the goal give me some new time
information then do my backtrace give me some new time
information you know and then print my output give me some new
time information so you can break those things down and say
well here I have these four important parts of what's going
on there and now if I'm 40% over I can see which one of those is
gonna make a difference right because you say well I'm 40%
over and reading the map was like 7% of my time
guess what you're not gonna get your time back by fixing how you
read the map that ain't the problem you could eliminate
reading the map and still be
33% over in my magic example so that's what you can do
with perf as As well, when you start talking about perf or with
tools like this,
it can help you figure out what it is.
But you have to write your code in such a way that you can
isolate sections of it and measure them.
And also know that every time you start and stop the thing,
what are you doing?
You start it.
You set some variable equal to something.
When you stop it,
you set some other variable and do some math.
So what you don't want to do is, Let me start my stopwatch and
stop my stopwatch inside of the million times loop
Right because it's non-zero amount of work It's not much
work But a million times of starting and stopping is
non-zero work And you don't want that to influence what you think
about your measurement, so it's better to say let me take a
stopwatch here Do it a million times and then take a stopwatch
there And then if I want to I can divide that out by a million
and figure out what's my average execution time But I don't want
to try to measure each loop because it adds too much work to
the situation to help you really get a good idea of what's going
on there.
All right, so that's what's going on in measuring runtime
performance.
Any questions on this?
Like I said, there is one of the videos in the playlist of me
doing the search demo.
So you can go watch that one and see me pull the code down, see
me build it, see me run it,
change the sizes, All that stuff trying to speed us up to catch
us up any other questions
Sweet
Runtime analysis tools here, so I did just mentioned perf This
is what perf looks like perf might be maybe the most
frustrating tool of all time so I
Don't know if you want to use it a whole bunch definitely cover
it in lab
but Perf is the late stage tool is why it's frustrating.
Perf measures running code to see how efficient
code that runs is, so you hear that, right?
It has to be working,
and for it to be working and make any sense,
it actually has to be working without bugs,
because if it's got bugs and you're trying to measure how to
make things faster and you're fixing stuff that doesn't need
to be fixed.
So, you can't really use perf until it's done and working
correctly.
So,
perf is a late-stage tool for that reason.
And what perf does is that, as you see in this picture here,
it gives you a percentage of the run time spent in and under
a particular function.
And the way that it does is it kind of marks up the processor
and it runs your code and then stops it and see, hey, what
function am I in?
And runs it and, ah, what function am I in?
What function am I in?
It just samples it over and over and over again,
thousands of times, and then adds all of those samples up and
says, well,
36% of the time,
when I looked,
you were in this function. So I infer from that that this
function is responsible for 36% of your time.
So it's not even the greatest information.
It's a good version of information.
it can be helpful it samples things and you can see it gives
you the total amount of time spent in a function and it says
also it's children so that's why you see you know Maine is up
there and almost the highest number that we can get there
right because all of the calls were children of Maine Maine
started and everything else came underneath that so that's why
it's high up there but then if you see that how much time was
spent in Maine itself here it's like 0% of the time right
because it literally said hey I'm gonna start main main said
do a thing the thing happened the thing happened the thing
happened and then we're done it was like one or two samples
inside main so it looks like main didn't take any time at all
which it
didn't but its children did because the things that it
called that's how you read this one and if you go into a live
version of it you can hit plus there and it'll expand any given
call and tell you the sub calls underneath that and how much
time they took so you can use this to say well here if I'm
trying to figure out how to get this code to be faster right
maybe I'm like 21% over what do I
see there like the only thing that might have a chance of me
fixing something there is maybe this seam function so I've got
to figure out if I can if I could fix scene carve itself but
oh no I'm off the line sorry that's mem copy SSE back well I
can't fix that can I right that's a system level library
level function that I'm not gonna fix so I'm gonna have to
go into somewhere else there's no one place where I'm gonna win
those 21 percent back from right I might be able to shave some
off of this image get pixel might be able to take some off
of matrix at so you're gonna be going back through here and sort
of looking at what you can do to speed up your code and that's
how perf gets used so you have to have some magic command line
to use with perf and every time I need to do it I go look in the
lab slides because I can't remember exactly the the
arguments for perf I should make that a command somewhere but
it's one I've just dragged my feet on.
That's how perf gets used.
Late stage tool.
This is another one here. This one is for measuring
runtime externally. So we looked at the timer class.
That's for measuring it internally.
I can instrument the code with it.
This one says if I can't modify it, well, can't I just start a
real stopwatch?
And that's what time does.
That's really how the autograder measures your stuff as well.
Because the autograder doesn't instrument your code.
It just starts a stopwatch,
runs it, and asks it.
So that's what the time command from Linux does.
So if you've got WSL,
or you can go to your command line on the Mac, and you can run
this command here,
it's user bin time. So if you type that into the
command line,
you type that in, and then you type whatever else you were
gonna type.
It runs your code and tells you some stuff about it.
So it'll do whatever it was supposed to run, and then
afterwards it'll print a line that looks like this.
You hear it says 0.84 seconds were spent in user time.
That's your code actually working.
0.0 time spent in system, so this is
the system time spent on your program's behalf.
So this one didn't have a lot of reading or writing because it
didn't have system time there.
And then 0.85 times is a total elapsed time.
So 0.84 was spent in your code and the
whole program took 0.85. So that's some overhead time, or
maybe the processor switched out to do something else while your
code was running,
came back.
And so it took 0.85 seconds, and it was busy doing
something else for 0.01 seconds.
So then it can tell you that you had the CPU 99% of the time.
That can also tell you something.
So you see something that's taken a long time, and you've
only got the CPU like 47% of the time,
something else is busy on your computer, and it's making you
feel like it's slow, But your actual execution isn't quite
maybe as slow. So that's how you can read user
bin time.
Oftentimes, you can also just type time as well.
There are two different.
One's a built-in. One's a program.
But both of them do the same thing.
The reports look a little different, but they give you the
same information.
So here's an example of it.
So this command here,
dd,
device duplicate, It copies from one device raw form
to another device.
So here it says the input file, that's what if looks like.
Input file is dev zero.
Anybody use Linux out there?
So dev zero is this magical device that looks like a file
and if you read from it,
it gives you zeros,
right?
But it's not a real device.
So it's got an unlimited amount of zeros.
You can keep reading and keep reading and keep reading and
keep reading because it will never run out of zeros because
they're not going to physical location to get them.
So that's what it is, it's a pseudo device.
The same thing on the other end,
the output file,
of.
So this is what disk duplicate does is it reads from here,
input,
and writes to there.
So if you wanna do that, you could do this yourself.
But this output file is called dev null, and dev null has also
got a nifty name, it's called the bitbucket,
because you can write to the bitbucket and it doesn't write
it anywhere.
It just acts like it did,
takes what you give it, and throws it away.
So I've got an infinite amount of zeros coming from dev zero,
and I've got an infinite amount of space to write to with dev
null. So when I say do this command
here, it's not gonna stop running until the computer dies
or the Sun cools
Right.
It's never gonna run out of zeros never gonna run out of
space to put them So you can use this as something that you can
measure with and the only way it's gonna get out of it is If
you kill the program yourself, so that's why you hit ctrl C
there and then you'll see it It'll shoot out something like
this.
This light code is what comes from DD itself Some information
about how many records it copied how long it took blah blah blah,
and then this bolded line here This is the output from time
that says okay. Well as we copied these
Whole bunch of bytes, what's that number big number?
As we copied those bytes it took us 0.26
users
0.26 seconds user time
0.65 second system time, which makes
sense, right? Because it's doing stuff with devices.
The system is using an input file and an output file on your
program's behalf. So the total amount of time here
is the sum of these two things, plus whatever was handed off.
You see here that 0.92 elapsed.
If you add those two up together, you get 0.91.
Once again, it's about 99% of the CPU time.
And these are rounded values,
so... But they're good enough to give
you some good information.
You can see that DD has its own time
information as well. So DD said, hey, by the way, we
thought we took 0.92598 seconds.
And that's exactly what we thought we took.
So time and DD just happens to do its own time measurements, is
all I'm saying.
But you can see how they're similar there, copied 1.7
Gigabytes in that amount of time, so this is a tool here.
That's that is very useful now What you don't want to do is try
to figure out how to get your time to be exactly like the
autograder time It's different hardware
Also really good for relative
Stuff so if you say I'm over time on the autograder did this
new fix change anything well time time time time time time
time
Get a number average that out
then make your changes and time,
time, time, time, time, time, time, get a number averaged out
and you'll see,
did it get faster or not?
Because if it doesn't get faster when you test it locally by 20%,
it's not going to get faster by 20% when you put it on the
autograder.
So this is how you can use time as a tool to measure your code
there.
Question on this one?
Yeah. So what's the measure time
between measure and memory?
Measuring memory is a different thing.
But yeah, there's ways to do it.
If you use a,
oops,
I'm drawing a total blank here.
It's a memory issue.
Yes,
there is,
like Valgrind obviously does mem check.
But there's also a tool in Valgrind called MASSIF.
And there's some stuff,
I think we talk about MASSIF in either some slides or also in
lab.
But MASSIF will do the same sort of thing as measure how much
memory gets used. It also gives you stack traces.
So you can see when I was at this amount of memory, what
function was I in? So you can see how your memory gets
developed there.
So that's how you would do that for sure.
Yeah.
Yes,
it's talking about heat memory and stack memory, yep.
So yeah, this is just a discussion of what I said here.
It talks about the four values that you get here, user time,
system time, elapsed time, and the percentage of CPU.
You can also get the man page of time
if you type this seemingly gender specific command in At
the command line and time for manual manual page
Valgrind hopefully you are using Valgrind Valgrind is your friend
We have the address sanitizer turn on that should also do your
friend Valgrind and the address sanitizer have a huge overlap of
what? they do I Can't really give you a real percentage
number, but I can make one up like 80% of the same stuff And
Valgrind does some things that ASan doesn't, and ASan does some
things that Valgrind doesn't.
But Valgrind is harder to get to,
starting to be more useful in more places.
It works really well on real Linux.
So on Cane,
you can get it on WSL.
It has been a challenge to get it working on Mac.
So you may not be able to do that if you've got a Mac.
If you really need to do it, and you should,
push it up to cane,
give it a run, see there.
So the way that you use Valgrind is similar to the way you use
other tools,
like time.
You say time and then whatever command line I was gonna do.
Valgrind and then whatever command line I was gonna do.
If you wanna give it some arguments,
Valgrind can take some of its own arguments like leak check
equals full or tool equals massive.
Valgrind will run the massive tool instead of the mem check
tool.
So when you run Valgrind by default, it says, oh, you want
me to use the tool memcheck.
You don't even have to say that, but it does.
But if you say tool massive,
it does a different thing. Memcheck checks to see, you
know, when you're making invalid steps onto your memory area or
making decisions based on uninitialized memory.
All that stuff that we do when we just type Valgrind, we get
memcheck. And you'll see it at the very
top as Valgrind starts spitting stuff out, it says memcheck in a
memory checker. But if you type dash dash tool
equals massive,
then you'll get Valgrind to do something completely different.
Valgrind is a pretty powerful tool.
So learning how to use this and other tools that make your life
easier is one of the best things
developers can do is learn your tools.
Learn your tools. Learn how to use VS Code if
you're going to use VS Code.
If you're going to use Xcode,
there is so much stuff to learn out of all of these tools.
I typically sit in my office on days when I don't go for lunch,
eating whatever I have in the room,
just watching YouTube videos like, oh, let me see 10 new
tricks on VS Code, right? And watch somebody do something, I
got to see all seven of those, and then I might get somebody to
do something new.
But I'm constantly learning new stuff about my tools, and say,
oh, I got to see these things two or three times to remember
how to do it too. So you can't just see it once
and remember it, you got to get it under your fingers.
You might have to put some configuration into your current
version of it,
something to do these things. But if you learn how to use your
tools and constantly learn and upgrade your tool set, this is
why we wrote the 201 course because it was originally, you
know, unflatteringly called the tools class.
I was walking at a dinner and I ran into the old chair at the
time. He said, oh yeah, you're
teaching that tools class. I'm like, it's not the tools
class.
Although we did, you know, in our own little circle, We called
it tools for tools by tools.
And then we changed it over to
computing for computer scientists and then they didn't
like that name either and so then we changed it to computer
science pragmatics and that's how 201 came about.
But it was all about people not being able to use their tools.
There's nothing more frustrating to me,
Dr. P,
all the staff than watching somebody
who really needs help but they're so slow with what
they're doing. Like, oh, you know you can do
that faster, right? is every time you're trying to do an
edit,
you're doing that big old long roundabout thing, no wonder it's
taking you so long.
So spend some time learning your tools.
You see somebody do something you don't know how to do, just
like, hey, how'd you do that?
What makes your screen look like that? Mine doesn't look like
that. Ask questions.
When I grew up,
we didn't all have computers.
We all had to go to computer lab.
At MIT,
almost nobody had computers when I was there.
We all went to the computer lab. these huge rooms with like 100,
200 computers in there. And you would just go log in,
and you'd sit by your friends. But the other thing that gave us
a chance to do is be walking in your seat.
It was like, oh, dude,
that guy has the same book that I have.
So we must be in the same class. I don't know him.
And he's doing something on his screen.
I was like, hey, man,
what'd you do?
You would learn something.
Now we all got our own little laptops.
We're like, I'm going to code over here.
I'm going to code.
I can get this done here. No one can see me.
You don't learn from other people when you do that, right?
So,
ask some people when you see somebody do something, if you
ever see somebody do something,
you don't know how to do it, ask somebody to do it.
Right, if you're in office hours,
ask the instructor, is there a better way to do this? I see
people typing make all, this is one that drives me nuts.
Make clean, make all.
Don't type make all, make all builds four executables.
Four,
you're trying to test one.
Hunt debug,
if you type make,
it makes hunt debug. If you type, if you really want
to type two words,
type make debug,
because it'll still just make that one executable.
Every time you type make all though,
it makes four executables,
wasting time,
wasting time, just making your life harder.
So this is how you use Valgrind.
There's some stuff about it.
You see that you can turn on leak check full.
That's a good flag to use.
Show leak kinds all.
That's another one that's good.
So that's Valgrind.
Questions.
Learn how to use a coverage tool.
That's the new one. I'm going to work that one into
the stuff.
Coverage tool will let you run your code and tell you how many
times you executed each line of that code.
Which is sweet.
Because then you can say, well, I wanted to test this and I ran
this test and there's all these lines that are still red.
Meaning my code never even went in there.
So I can't be testing it if I didn't execute those lines.
That's what a coverage tool will tell you.
Coverage tool is probably gonna be much more useful to you when
you're trying to figure out what your time problem is than perf
is.
The coverage tool will tell you how many times did you hit the,
why did I,
I just doubled the number of inputs and I can see that this
line has gone up by four. So this must be being handled
quadratically for some reason.
And then that's where you can fix things.
So look into a coverage tool.
Let's see if I have the staff write something up.
We'll come for it.
All right,
let's recurse.
We saw this.
No, this is a new one.
X to the n.
I'm going to write this function called power.
We give it x and then sum n, the base and an exponent.
If I asked you to write this function,
you could do it.
It's pretty easy, right?
Just x times x times x times x times x, n minus 1 times.
So you could write that in a loop pretty easily.
I could ask you to write that recursively pretty
easily as well right because X to the N is really just X
times X to the N minus 1
so now I've been able to
define this exponent function in terms of another exponent
Function that's that's the heart of recursive work there so you
can write this linearly in a loop you could write this
linearly in a recursive function
Then what about this less obvious way here could you write
this in a nonlinear?
But logarithmic way
Right if you if you know that two to the eighth is just two
times two times two times two times two times two times two
times two
That's the linear version.
But if I say two to the eighth is two times two,
take that times two,
take that times two, then I can do it with fewer
multiplications.
Could you write that one?
How do you handle it if it's not two to the eighth or two to the
16th or two to the 32nd?
What happens when it's two to the 12th?
Well, that's two to the sixth times two to the sixth.
So if I just calculate two to the sixth, I just multiply them
together.
Great.
Well,
two to the sixth is what? Two to the third times two to the
third.
So we just get those two, I can multiply them together and then
multiply them together again, I got the 12th.
But two to the third,
I can't divide that back down and get to my power of two.
So that one's a bit more challenging.
So it says here,
can you find the linear version,
the logarithmic version, And can you write both of them,
both iteratively and recursively?
So,
iteratively means with a loop,
recursively means with a function that calls itself.
And it takes this tiny little, simple little problem and kind
of expands it out a little bit.
So,
they shouldn't be giving you too much trouble.
I'm going to run through them anyway.
Okay,
here's what accounts for
computing x to the n.
If n is equal to zero, we're gonna return one.
Otherwise,
set result equal to x, and then for every time I've got some
thing that I need to multiply it by, I just multiply the result
by x.
Result equals result times x.
And this could have been a times equal x,
whatever.
This one is big ol'
N,
right?
This is very obviously linear.
We're starting at something like one or zero.
We're going up to N, and we're getting there by plus plussing.
This is the iterative one, because we got a four loop.
So this is the linear iterative version, one out of four.
When we wanted to analyze that, we just looked at the loop and
said, Yeah, I get it
So you see this is the the iterative version here This is
just a much more compact version of what was done in the previous
slide, but it's the exact same stuff
Over here on the right is the recursive version you see we
calculate power of X by saying I'm gonna return X times the
power so I had to calculate power to define power Which is
why it's recursive
Right, recursive functions don't work without a base case.
But if I look at this, I can say,
this is pretty obviously linear.
What about that one?
What do we think about that one?
Is that one linear?
What do you think?
It is,
but how we prove it, that's the question, right?
So the question mark says, we need another tool to analyze
this, because yeah, I can't just look at that and say, well,
I know it's linear.
Great how do you explain this to someone else right the good news
is we got like a minus one in there that tells me that we're
gonna go from one end to the one that and it's right next to it
the end is next to it and it's next to it so this is why I get
the linear feel from it but I need a tool still to analyze
that so that's where the recurrence relation comes in if
you look at this here is X to the end written in the
recurrence form right And this is just the mathy version say X
to the N is either one when N is equal to zero or It's X times X
to the N minus one when N is greater than zero So that's the
mathematical definition of X to the N if I want to look at
analyzing this I say well in that case T of N
T of N is the time it takes me to do this calculation With N as
my variable there T of N is equal to some constant amount of
work
When n is equal to zero right because if it's zero I just
return one I don't have to do much so it's a constant amount
of work when n is zero But when n is greater than zero I say
that T of n is just well I got to take a smaller one, so let's
call it T of n minus 1
Plus some constant on a work to bring things together different
constant, so that's my Recurrence relation for how much
time it should take me
For that math you see how similar they are
This one down here, this m of n is similar to t of n, but it's
just talking about how much memory I'm going to use.
Memory in stack frames,
and so it makes pretty much the same show there in this
particular instance.
But this is what I get for a non-tail recursive version of
this, right? And that's what we looked here.
This one here is non-tail recursive.
So the analyzing of that says, hey look it's C 0
if n is equal to 0 otherwise it's T of
n minus 1 yes that's T of
n minus 1 plus some other constant which is the
multiplication of
X times this other call so you can look right at the code and
see where that recurrence relationship comes from right so
this recurrence relation here that T of N comes from there you
can see the branches in the code that first branch is just
constant time it's a different constant than the other one
that's why I call it C 0 and I call the other one C 1 the
second constant comes from the math that I have to do to
combine this X that I already have and my recursive call
the recursive call is now smaller because it's in minus
one and so you can look at these things and find them pretty
easily if you've got code right in this case I can take math
write code analyze the code or if you get good enough at it you
can analyze the math directly so how do we solve that I said we
needed a tool for solving that recurrence relation we're gonna
start out with this substitution Method it's covered in a bunch
of textbooks, but it's pretty straightforward You just write
out T of n you write out T of n minus 1 you change those things
you do some substitutions You keep writing out you keep
substituting it back in and eventually you recognize some
pattern from there You can make a closed form and then you get
your answer. So let's give it a shot here
Here's this one that we said was we thought it was linear So we'd
like to prove it and the way that I'm gonna do that Say,
well, let's just mark something down for now t of 0 is
definitely C 0
You see that?
When n is equal to 0 the answer is 0 so t of 0 is C sub 0 Then I
can also say just from above t of n is equal to t of n minus 1
plus C 1 And that's what it says above there.
Let's just copy that down What if I do a substitution and say
everywhere I see an n I'm gonna substitute n minus 1 for it Then
I get an expression that looks like this T of n turns into n
minus 1 is
Equal to T of n minus 1 turns into n minus 2
You see that substitution yay, man, all right, yeah
Yeah, well all I'm doing is I'm substituting look at the line
right above it the two red lines I changed every n to an n minus
1 and so I didn't so I didn't do anything really right Yeah, so
the the constants don't change so now I've got this new version
of T of n minus 1 and I'm gonna substitute that back into the
first line So then I can still write now T of n is equal to T
of n minus 1
But if I use the previous version it looks like this is n
minus 1
So I say T of n is equal to T of n minus 1
That's just T of n minus 3 plus C1.
Right?
It's just a substitution.
Now I've substituted n minus 2 for n into the very first line.
Great.
Substitute that back in there. I say T of n is equal to T of n
minus 3 plus C1. C1
Plus C1 Plus C1, right? So this is what I get when I substitute
this T of n minus 2 back into there
Right this takes over for that
Now that's what I get
I'm following the math so far I I started to see a pattern here
because I can say this is really just T of n minus 3
plus 3 times C sub 1
1
You with me on that?
All right
Great, I could even go farther and say I bet if I went to T of
n minus K
Plus K times C sub 1 that would work
That's me substituting because I picked three why can't I pick K
great?
But I thought we were trying to simplify this and it looks like
we've just added new letters It's the opposite of algebra
trying to get rid of letters but I did choose K so I could take
the K that I like I'm gonna take a K such that and And minus k
is equal to zero. What if I choose that k because
I can What does that tell me then that n is equal to k?
At that location so then I can say T of n is really
T of n minus k
But when k is equal to zero that's really T of zero
Right n minus k and that's 0 T of 0 and then that I'm gonna add
to it K times C 1 that's this parameter here, but really it's
not K anymore because I said I picked the one where it's n
Times C 1 and since I've got this thing up here
What does that tell me this just says this is T of n is equal to
C sub 0 plus n
times C sub 1
There's my wife
Got it
C sub 0 plus n times C sub 1 right this is a closed form
solution now you see I've got T of n
Completely in terms of constants and n it's no longer in terms of
T of n When we started T of n was in terms of T of n it was
recursive This is how I can boil this down and so now it tells me
if I see that recurrence relation
That the answer is gonna be something like this.
It's going to be linear. This is how I know that it's
linear We thought it was linear from looking at the code and
this is how we prove that it is
question on this
It's algebra the pre-college stuff good
so whenever I see this recurrence relation I know the
complexity is theta n so that's the cool part too is I just did
all that work and now you'll never have to do that work again
for this equation when you see it just use it if your
recurrence relation says T of n is equal to T of n minus 1 plus
some constant amount of work then you know right away yeah
that's just linear I'm good with that what about this one let's
say we're gonna divide by half same way we're gonna do the same
thing it's gonna be a little bit different here though I'm gonna
say cuz t of one
what's that gonna be
when I take t of one
that's one divided by two and this is remember we're doing
this with discrete things here so we're doing integer division
so 1 divided by 2 is not 1 half 1 divided by 2 is 0 so
if I say T of 1 as is well when I get down to one,
it really ends up looking like c0,
right?
C0 plus c1.
When t of one is that because, right, this looks like t of one
over two plus c1.
And since we've got integer math here, This looks like T of zero
plus C one, which looks like C zero plus C one, which I'm going
to heretofore call C,
so lazy.
We're good?
This is our base case.
We can't do any recursion without a base case.
That's what we did last time. We got our base case at zero.
Here I'm getting my base case. It's easier to get a base case
at one,
but a base case has got to get me stopped somewhere.
So next up, we just start the substitution thing.
We say T of n is equal to T of n over 2 plus C1.
And then I substitute n over 2 for n.
So n over 2 is equal to T of n over 4 plus C,
and that should be C1.
Substitute T of n is equal to T of n over 2, which I'll use this
version.
So that's T of n over 4 plus C1 plus that,
plus C1.
All right
Right and I could keep going you see that now right I can say
this is also T of I'm skipping a step here for you all that are
off
Talk less right more and over 8 plus C 1 plus C 1 plus C
1 I would get that eventually by doing another round of
substitution right and so that I can say this is really T of N
over 8 plus 3 times C 1 or if I wanted to
Generalize I say this is T over T of N over 2 to the K
Plus K times C 1
Right when K is 3 this is 8 that's 3 everybody matches So
now I'm gonna do the same thing. I'm gonna pick pick a particular
K. What's the K that I want to
pick?
I want to do this at the place where N is equal to 2 to the
K right because then when I divide it and
divided by 2k it's just one when they're equal
so at n is equal to 2 to the K super messy
at n is equal to 2 to the K what do I know about
K take the log of both sides log base two of n is equal to
k so we go
back and stick it all in there right so I end up with T of n
is equal to
and we're gonna take this version and stick The stuff we
like in it at n equals 2 to the K.
That's just T of 1
Because n divided by 2 the K is 1 plus
K
Times C 1 but K is really log base 2 of n
So here I can say log base 2 of
n Times C 1 and
Since we know that T of 1 from this substitution looks like
some other constant this just looks like C plus log n
of C 1
Everybody done with math today good.
You don't have to do these again whenever you see this component
this this
Relationship this recurrence relation T is equal to T of N is
equal to T of N over 2 plus some constant amount of work That's
always just logarithmic
This is what this is binary search
I found it.
I looked in the middle. I didn't find it So then I cut
half of those things off I looked in the middle of fun
didn't find it cut half of those things off cut half of those
things off
Anytime I see that this is what I'm gonna get
So It says here this one works with a pile function that we
were dealing with
It also fits binary search Sounds like something I said
Cut the search space in half each time the function recurses
in only one half
Good
All right, so here's our recurrence thought exercises as
we wrap this one up
What if a recurrence cuts a problem into two sub-problems
and then we process both sub-problems?
What happens there? So the one we just looked at was,
I cut it in half and I did one of those.
What happens if I cut it in half and I do both of them?
Yeah.
It's a tree?
That's how trees work, yes, absolutely.
But I'm saying,
what is the complexity of that?
Absolutely, it's just linear. So if I cut it into half and
then I process each half and in processing that half I cut that
into halves and I cut that in half and that every time I cut
it into half though if I process both halves
Think about lunch here Doesn't matter how many times you cut
your sandwich in half if you eat both of those halves you've
eaten the whole thing
Get done. I can't believe I ate the whole
thing
but That's linear right I've covered everything in there if I
cut it in half and then continue to process both halves So that's
the question on that one. What if I cut it into three sub
problems now What do I cut it into three sub problems, and I
just process one piece. What do you say that is?
It's logarithmic right it's log base 3, but still logarithmic
great. What happens if I process two
pieces
We well it was a little sloppier here
If I process all three pieces
That's back to linear again, right? It doesn't matter how
many pieces I cut it into if I eat them all I ate the whole
thing so processing two pieces though.
That's kind of in the middle right so this is log base 3 of
n and this is n and so this is somewhere in between
Right and we'll we'll learn a tool to figure that one out You
probably have already seen it before if you want the answer
now. It's really big O of
n to the log base 3 of
2
That's what it is so log base 3 of 2 is
All right
And then this other question what if there is an additional
non constant amount of work So what that means is the non
constant amount of work is what if there's something more than
just C 1 here
So that's an additional non constant amount of work That's
the question is what if there's an additional non constant
amount of work after the recursion
Something that has to do with linear work or quadratic work,
right? It has to be based on n if it's non constant
Enter the binomial coefficient.
Re-enter. We've already talked about it
once.
And choose k.
So now we could write this one, couldn't you?
You could write this one pretty easily.
You know how to write factorial,
right?
What's factorial?
Five factorial is just five times four times three times two
times one.
Or you could also say five factorial is five times four
factorial.
So you could write it iteratively or you could write
it recursively.
Great. So if I ask you to write this
Inomial coefficient function to be like great.
Give me two numbers. I'll make it happen and
factorial K factorial and minus K factorial multiply divide
Done
Think about it We'll come back to it.
All right,
so that's analyzing recursion that gets us out of Tuesday and
And we got about 10 solid minutes to wrap up Thursday.
Why don't we all get it all done, but we'll work on it.
Like I said, we're going to be behind here for a minute.
You can breathe for a minute now while I download some files.
All right, I love this poster.
Seen those motivational posters.
Recursion,
here we go again, here we go again, here we go again.
Also,
if you've ever looked something up on Google and it does some
suggesting for you,
like you look something up and say, did you mean this?
So if you look up recursion on Google,
it will say, did you mean recursion? And if you click that
link, it's a Google search for recursion.
And it'll say,
did you mean recursion? And it's a Google search for recursion.
So I don't know if some tricky little Google engineer wrote
that, because that's the kind of thing coders might do.
But it's a funny little bit of recursion out there.
So let's talk about recursion.
This introduction to recursion is really a reintroduction to
recursion, because I know that you learned it in 280,
or whatever CS2 course you had prior to this.
What about recursion is just some function that calls itself
to do its work, right? As long as we know that the function is
calling itself with less work to do, it will eventually
terminate.
That's what recursion is all about.
We have to have a base case, and that's the most important thing
the part of the day where I start singing the Meghan Trainor
song,
you know it's all about that base,
about that base.
Gotta have a base case,
not a Base case,
recursion just doesn't work.
And somehow,
when I was sitting in your seats,
I didn't quite get that the first time I learned it.
And so,
I remembered struggling mightily, I could never get my
functions to stop. And they just kept crashing and
crashing and crashing because you have to lead with the base
case. Write the base case first.
You have to check for that first.
You need to know,
hey,
am I done already?
Oh, if not, then I should do some work.
Because if I'm done, I should stop.
So base case has to come first. You have to have at least one of
them.
It's possible to have multiple base cases, depending on the
problem definition.
You have to have at least one recursive case.
Otherwise, it wouldn't be recursive.
So at least one of each of those things.
And then each subsequent call has to have simpler or smaller.
It has to be a reduction of the amount of work to be done.
We can use single recursion to process a list.
We use multiple recursion to process trees,
process the left side, process the right side, and so on.
So that's what recursion is. So we already talked about this
job interview question. This was power.
We looked at this version of it, but now here is
So this is the linear version this is when we looked at and
analyzed this one We didn't mess with right here, though Look at
it. It says what is X to the end X
the end is just one if n is equal to zero great That's the
easy branch
now if n is even and
and greater than zero it's pretty straightforward as well x
to the n is just x to the n over 2 times itself if n is odd we do
some integer division and x to the n is just x to the n of
its even half times itself times one more x
so there is the mathematical definition of how to calculate
x to the
recursively
Right we have defined x to the n you say well You can calculate x
to the n if you can raise x to some power Which is x to the n
so this is the recursive definition we were this defined
x to the n in terms of x to the n
Looking like a perfectly good place for some Recurrence
analysis so look at this one you would say this is a constant
amount of work wouldn't you that's pretty easy one to see
I'm gonna jump ahead and just do the work on the math.
We'll see the code in a second What about this one the bottom
one right that looks like?
That looks like T of n over 2 work
Because it's just saying if you give me X to the n over 2 I can
do a constant amount of work and multiply It by itself and get
your answer
great
What about that third one third one is pretty similar, right?
It's the same amount of work. It's approximately T of n over 2
work
but I've got to do an Additional multiplication so you might say
well, that's really just some other constant
So if you wanted to be really pedantic about it You could
always divide this into three branches, or you could also just
realize you know those two branches at the bottom They work
exactly the same with a slight difference in constants, which
we're perfectly happy with ignoring anyway So I would say
that it's one of these two things So this one then would
say well I could solve that version with exactly what I used
Right because we said whenever we see this recurrence relation.
We've already solved that big O
log base 2 of n
So I don't have to do any work here, I know
All right, let's look at it There's my recursive linear
version. We saw that already
This now is my recursive
Logarithmic version you see the logarithmic field to it because
if you look up and down
There ain't a plus one or minus one in the house.
I Do have a divide by two though, which lets me start
thinking. I bet this is probably
logarithmic
Say what controls my work in this function well and does
How do I change n?
n gets divided by two,
yeah,
that's logarithmic.
What you look at it says, okay,
the result is just equal to, if you give me the, if you call it
for x to the 12th, for instance, it says, well, I'll just go
calculate x to the sixth and multiply x to the sixth times x
to the sixth,
right?
Line five says, if you give me 12, I'll go get six,
and then line six says I'll multiply x to the sixth times x
to the sixth, and that's how I get x to the 12th.
Line 7 and 8 say, by the way, if it was 13, there's one extra x
hanging out there, so we'll just use that in an additional
multiplication.
But this is logarithmic
recursive
calculation of exponentiation.
Yep?
You divide the container into two halves.
Mm-hmm.
And you process them and you process them.
Yes,
but I put them together in the constant work, right?
Because this X to the sixth however much work it takes me
when I multiply by X to the sixth I don't have to do all of
that work again to get an X to the sixth
So for instance if I was doing a linear search right if I was if
I was doing a search for a thing I said well here I'm gonna cut
it in half and then I'm gonna search this half and then I'm
gonna search that half That's what I mean by processing both
halves right if I decide to look in both halves Then I will have
covered the whole thing right even if I say well I'm I'm
working on this half and to find it in this half.
I'm gonna cut into two halves I'm gonna look in this quarter
And we'll look in that quarter Then I will have processed the
whole thing because every time I cut it in half I look at all of
the things anyways
Here in this one when I cut it in half.
I'm not doing all the multiplications anyway, right? X
to the 12th we know that's X times X times X times X times X
I'm excellent, but I'm not doing that I'm just doing X times X
five times and then multiplying that by itself
Right that's what this line here says is after you've got X to
the sixth
Instead of calculating it again multiply it by itself and turn
that into X to the 12th
Alright, so my branches are here.
Yep, I got a this is my cease of zero you can see it
And then this is my,
well I guess just the first line by itself, this is my T of N
over two.
And then there's a constant amount of work here, this is at
least C one,
and then there might be a little bit of additional work here,
that's kind of C two.
So you can see the things from the code that I discussed on the
previous version of it, and this function is a combination of all
of them.
You had one, go for it. Yeah.
I wonder if you wrote x to the n over 2, like, two times,
or I guess, like,
should it be, like, two times the n over 2?
Oh,
no.
Here's why, right?
Here's where I did the work to get results.
I did this work. This cost me time.
But then in a constant amount of time, I was able to get x to the
12th because I just took that value and multiplied it by
itself.
So in one more moment, because it could have taken me hundreds
of multiplications to get that first result,
and then I can get the second version in one more
multiplication.
It's a constant amount of work.
So,
we look at this one. Let's clear it up a little.
Scribbled.
The recurrence that we saw earlier was T of N is equal to T
of N minus one. We know that's linear this
recurrence. We see that T of N is based on T
of N over 2
Right and we said any time we see that recurrence
We always know that it's logarithmic.
So that's what this one does
All right, that's my intro to recursion like I said a re-intro
to recursion you've done it
Even worse for me,
I was at a pretty solid headache in my eye stage when I was
trying to understand recursion,
because humans aren't really good at understanding recursion,
not nearly as good as computers are.
But I'm sitting in the chair and I'm like, this recursion is
giving me a headache because it makes my brain hurt.
Then they said, well, what about tail recursion?
It was already lost, I don't know, I don't care.
So tail recursion is what's next here.
I think this is giving us our first XKCD this semester.
If you haven't read XKCD, it's a lot of fun.
It's this really nerdy cartoon.
Guy was a NASA engineer and he left being a NASA engineer to
write comics.
So he's super smart. He knows a bunch of stuff and
you can see it, it just kind of leaks into there.
But it also can be a bit nerdy, but if you understand what's
going on,
it's really quite hilarious.
So why do you like functional programming so much? So you have
to understand why functional programming works the way it
does.
Functional programming is almost always tail recursive.
And so that's why his answer is tail recursion is its own
reward.
So what is tail recursion?
When we make a function call,
it gives us a stack frame.
You've seen that before. Stack Frame is where all the
local variables are, where it stores the return value that
it's going to kick back,
all of that stuff.
When any function gets called, it needs a Stack Frame.
So if a function calls itself,
both invocations of that function need their own Stack
Frame.
So when I recurse,
I've got the Stack Frame for the original call,
the second call, the third call, the fourth call all the way to
the n minus 1th call.
And so it can take up a lot of room in memory because these
stack frames pile up.
Anybody know what happens when we get too many stack frames?
Stack overflow. All right, all right.
Just making sure you're with me here.
That's where the name came from. It's a real thing.
It's a funny little website, but stack overflow happens when I
have too many stack frames called.
So in tail recursion,
the tail recursion and says, you know what?
If you're done with that stack frame,
if you're done with it, can I use it?
Sat down at a table, hey man, you done with that fork?
Can I use it?
Stack frame's not so dirty.
All right.
But if the very last thing I do is recurse,
then I'm done with the stack frame.
if the very last thing I do is call myself.
Like in the previous version we said,
well call myself minus one,
and then when I get that back,
multiply it by x.
So the very last thing I did was multiply by x.
It wasn't called a function.
So when the very last thing I do is call myself,
that's what's known as tail recursion,
and the compiler and the runtime environment say well then if
you're willing to do that as a last step you don't even need
this stack frame anymore so I'm gonna let the new call just move
into your house cuz you're done with it that's what tail
recursion is like I said it's kind of a pain in the eye when
you're trying to think about it tail recursion and iteration
however end up being equivalent because normal recursion takes
more memory with every stack frame.
So I can do the same amount of work in linear time or
logarithmic time or whatever, but it takes me more memory.
So in the case of tail recursion,
you saw that M of N expression earlier and the T of N
expression, they were the same.
When I use recursion, they might not be the same.
So I could get something done in linear time and take a constant
amount of memory or I could get something in a linear amount of
time and take a linear amount of memory depending on how I set my
stack frames up and so that's where tail recursion comes in
no it just needs one frame yeah it just reuses that frame over
and over again for that function right other functions can have
their own frames but if that,
I mean,
when I call, for instance, fib50,
it needs 49 stack frames to get that work done,
but if I do it tail recursively,
I can use that same stack frame.
So you're saying that this rule,
like tail recursion and iteration are like always true?
You don't need an additional data structure?
Right, you don't need to do any additional data structure, it's
just how you write the code here.
So here you see this one. This one is non tail recursive
Because like in line four I say factorial is just n times
calling factorial again But I have to hold that n in my own
stack frame and wait till that call comes back to do the
multiplication That's why I need my own stack frame so I can
remember my in If you were gonna use the stack frame all for
yourself you would use your own in
So that one's not tail recursive.
We'll pick up here at tail recursion on on Tuesday.
