I'm just going to go back to the last step.

What I was going to tell you is that other people have different

opinions.

I'm going to say four of those.

As someone who is a professional leader,

they said improve something.

Or like, all my stuff.

We're at the four moment,

you have to define it, and then you're ready to do it.

I'm

going

to

go to the bathroom and see if there's anything else I can do

with it.

I'm going to read it for her.

I'm going to read it for her. I'm going to read it for her.

I'm going to read it for her. I'm going to read it for her.

I'm going to read it for her.

I'm going to read it for her.

I'm going to read it for her. I'm going to read it for her.

I'm going to read it for her. I'm going to read it

for her.

I'm going to read it for her. I'm going to read it for her.

I'm going to read it for her.

All right,

well,

it's a good day to be here,

feeling like smiling.

I can't see you out there when you're not,

so you know.

All right, so I talked about the machine-generated version of

the notes around here.

This is it. It's pretty slick.

I threw it in the GitHub pages,

so it's kind of got this blog format.

It's got the date that the lecture took place and some

nifty Gen AI-generated title and whatnot.

So it's just at Marcus Darden github.io

slash lecture text.

See the URL right there.

So it needs a little bit of publishing,

but it goes in here,

starts out with the stuff,

talks about the stuff that we talked about in lecture.

through some final thoughts in there there's some study

questions some nifty little multiple-choice

questions so I don't know how well this will work for you

studying if it sucks tell me if it needs

help tell me I'd like to add some more to it I'm gonna put

some links into the the playlist videos so It'll show you right

where we are in the content,

and also try to figure out some way to assign some pictures from

the lab slides.

So maybe you can get something else here in this content too,

but I don't know. I'm pretty happy with it.

Maybe it has some formatting issues I had to take care of.

I can see there's some stuff going on with those questions.

But you can still read them, so it's not like they're illegible.

So that's it.

Oh, not that.

So, save that, store it,

go check it out.

It'll be great for studying when studying time comes.

Like I said, you can add to it as well.

There's a link at the top of the page.

If you have an issue,

just throw a GitHub issue on there and hopefully somebody

will get to editing that or fixing it.

So none of this stuff is corrected, really.

So like I said, it still has the ability to be slightly wrong in

there. But it's pretty good from what

I've seen so far.

It's fixed some things that I said that needed fixing, and

it's in good shape.

So check that out.

Share it with a friend who couldn't make it to lecture

today.

They should have.

but that's where we are.

All right,

so let's pick up here

at the standard template library.

We'll be talking about the STL today.

We are a smidge behind the other lectures because I keep talking

about so many other things but I'm trying to get you all of the

stuff that you need,

not just some of this. We will catch up.

We always have time to catch up near the end but I think we're

trailing the others just by a little bit, half lecture or so.

So some stuff I'm gonna try to go faster on.

Feel free to get your questions in there, but if I'm going fast,

it's because I'm trying to catch us up.

So the standard template library will be using this.

Obviously, you've heard the STL.

It's included in C++.

It's been greatly expanded in 11.

It's now cruising along at C++ 17 and 20 and beyond.

It's really nice, well-documented, high-quality

code.

You got these containers at work under some really common,

some really common abstract data types.

We've got some really great algorithms, all of them debugged

and fast and adaptable, so you can use func doors and other

things like that to make things work.

It's all done in header files, so it doesn't have to be

pre-compiled,

which means you can use your own custom types in these

containers,

use your own custom objects in these algorithms,

and so on.

You can even look at the code if you like.

You should, it's interesting.

It's written kind of in that grumpy, library-written style

with a whole lot of,

a whole lot of pre-compiler options and weird constant

declarations. But the heart of the code is

there when you go see push back And you see that it runs out of

space, and it needs to go get more stuff.

You'll see how the code works for a deck, if you so choose.

Oftentimes,

when you write stuff in there, and we have these errors that

get foisted upon you,

you've done something wrong in your code.

But the problem doesn't show up until it gets into the STL.

You'll see it'll drop you into vector.h

when you've done something wrong.

So you can cruise around there and see how pushback works.

It's worth taking a look. But you can see how people write

code at the library level.

The things we'll be looking at in the STL, of course,

containers and iterators.

We'll be looking at utilities and function objects.

We won't mess with memory allocators too much.

They are in there that allow you to customize the way some memory

gets allocated.

Not a task that we need to do in 281 this year, so we don't

discuss memory allocators in class.

Also,

obviously,

algorithms. There's stuff in there that can

really get some stuff done that you want to do on a regular

basis,

neat and clean and in most cases in one or two lines.

That's also nice.

Less code,

less the debug,

less probability of an error.

So when you write something and then it causes a crash in some

other STL file, we call that an induced error.

So the problem is still yours.

I've never found a student's code that exposed a bug in the

STL in 281.

So could happen, I'm not saying they couldn't, but thus far it's

always been in student code, not in the STL.

The resources we have here are the book on the left.

You see this is the C++ programming language.

It's in its fourth edition.

The author here, Bjorn Stroustrup,

is the guy when it comes to C++.

He created the language and still writes the book and works

on the language every day, to my knowledge, at this point.

So,

he's not dead, still writing books.

But this book is great.

It is the absolute

oracle on C++.

It's got a couple of different uses,

too. I like to read it when I'm

vertical.

I can learn something.

And other times,

if I wanna read it horizontal, I can really get to sleep fast.

because it's not exciting.

But it is very thorough. It is a reference book.

It is not a novel.

It is something that will teach you all about C++

if you need it.

The book on the right we used to use.

We don't use it so much anymore.

It is just a book that covers the STL in particular.

This book is all about,

Bjarne's book is all about C++.

This book is all about the STL.

You can get all of this information, and both of them

online.

So mostly we just point people to cppreference.com

or c++.com if you want some information

about the STL.

Both of those sites do about the same.

They're about the same, they're just laid out differently.

I'm more of a c++.com fan than a cppreference.com

fan.

And it's just because of the way that the sites are laid out.

C++.com works better with my mind than

cppreference.com does.

So find one,

get comfortable with it, and use it.

They both have this really cool feature on cppreference.com,

it's called Run This Code.

On C++ it's called Edit and Run.

And so you'll go into a container or you'll go into an

algorithm and it will say,

here is some representative code of this because at its heart,

the STL is just a specification.

The standard template library is a specification.

You should provide these containers.

You should provide these algorithms.

But different people have implemented the STL.

So there's the GCC version of the STL,

the GNU compiler.

There's also the Clang version of the STL.

There's a Microsoft version of the STL.

So the STL says this is how it should be, and then the

individual implementers implemented themselves.

So in the documentation when it says,

this is how this function would work,

it's obviously not anyone's particular implementation, but

it's representative.

So you can look and see how a function would work like set

intersection or set union.

You can see that code and if you want to mess around with it,

there's a button on both of these sites that says,

let me drop this into an online editor where I can make some

changes, compile it test it see if it works with what I was

trying to do I do that all the time when I've got a small thing

that I'm trying to figure out with an algorithm I'll just copy

some stuff from my actual file like maybe the the struct or

class definition paste it into the editor and compile it and

see if I wanted to do with the things I want to do really cool

feature without having to do a whole bunch of setup for some

tests on stuff that you want to use.

So check both of those out.

Like I said,

pick one.

Find the one that you like the way that it looks or the way

that it's laid out, however is going to make you most

effective.

Learn one of them because they are a primary reference for us.

When we're using libraries,

we got some pros and cons here.

And the pros and cons are, should we use the library

or should we do it ourselves?

So the reason why we love libraries is because a lot of

this stuff is just hard to implement.

Intro sort,

red-black trees,

those are things that get used in the STL.

You could write your own, but it's hard.

Why would we want to?

Some of them are hard to implement well.

You could implement it, but then how do you get it to really,

really be performative?

The STL has already done all that work, so it's another good

reason.

There's also the concept that as a library as a whole,

this has been discussed and worked on in large groups of

people, sometimes open source,

but a lot of people have contributed to this and so there

tends to be a continuity across it or this uniformity it says

for simple algorithms.

This just means that when something happens in a section

of the library that you haven't visited,

it happens just like it happens in the other sections.

So the or do the parameters are going to be the same, you don't

have to reinvent the wheel every time you look at a new function,

and that's what a broad library can give you that.

And then the bottom one, which is probably the most important

thing, it reduces debugging time for complicated programs.

This unverified stat in the red

is one that you probably wouldn't argue with,

says greater than 50% of development time is spent in

testing and debugging.

Not as,

like I said, I don't know that it's verified, but it's

certainly hard to argue with. It might be even higher than

that.

But when you use the STL,

you're taking great chunks of code that have been tested and

debugged fully.

So you know the problem isn't in your container, for instance,

it's more in how you use the container.

And so if you write your own container,

then you say,

well, it could be how I'm using container or it could be the

container itself. With the STL, we don't have to

worry about that. So that's nice.

We use these high-quality libraries,

limits the code, and it limits the code that we're responsible

for. And that can greatly reduce your

debugging time.

When I was coaching the programming team from U of M, I

did that for a couple of years.

The people that work on those teams,

man, they know these libraries inside and out.

Problem shows up on the problem specification.

They read it. and then five to 10 lines of STL

code show up and the whole thing is done.

It's really amazing what you can do when you know how to use a

library and you know what's in it.

So that's one of the things that you need to do.

The cons, of course,

is that everything in the library is written to be general

purpose for everyone to use.

So in some situations, there could be a better version

for exactly what you wanna do that's more restricted to your

problem solution. it's faster because it doesn't

have to do some checks that everybody else might have to do

in the general situation so it can run a little faster so you

have to make those trade-offs for instance in project 4

there's a function in the STL called next permutation you give

it a range of things and it spits out every single

permutation so you think you got five items there's five

factorial different ways that you could order those five

things 50 items there's 50 factorial ways and so on next

permutation will run through and generate every single one of

those we're gonna need that functionality in project 4 but

we're gonna be doing an algorithm called branch and

bound and part way through the algorithm you can say well this

branch is dead.

I've already violated a constraint,

or I've already decided 10 steps into 50 that this isn't going to

be my best solution.

So with your own permutation generator,

you can say,

don't try to generate anything else down this branch,

because I know the first steps lead me to ruin.

Why take the next 40 factorial ways to take those first 10

steps and finish 50 items?

Next permutation from the STL is going to generate all of them.

Your own personal version, though,

can prune and say,

well,

that's something I don't need to develop.

So that's one thing that we will do in particular in this course.

We say,

well,

the STL already does this.

We're going to use our own, though, because it is better in

our particular case.

So you're always trying to weigh whether or not you should use a

library or do it yourself. And it has to do with what's

custom about your solution, how much time you want to spend on

debugging,

and so on.

So the trade-offs are we have to figure out how to use the

library well before we can really fully utilize it.

Know what data instructions are there,

know what algorithms are there,

know the complexities of some of the operations.

Because as I said earlier, the STL is really just a

specification, so it'll say something like, you need to

generate this vector container that has an amortized constant

pushback.

However you want to do it at the library level, you can,

but if it's going to be considered an STL

implementation, it has to do it at that complexity.

That's what's going on there.

So knowing these complexities will tell you what I should do.

You need to know some of the details, like how standard sort

works. We know that it's always n log

n, even in the worst case,

practice.

It's typically faster than quicksort.

Nth element,

some little factoids in here. Knowing factoids about what's

going on in the library is going to be helpful.

Some features the STL relies upon are, of course,

bool.

We use the bool type a lot.

Some strange things, if you use the STL function binary

It returns a bool.

Yes, I found that thing, or no, I did not.

Not how you think of search.

You usually say, well, I'm looking for something.

I want you to tell me where it is.

But the STL does some things. There's ways to find it in the

STL, don't get me wrong.

But it uses this bool type,

const correctness and const cast for speed.

It uses namespaces, of course. You've seen the STL with

everything as std. People say std or standard.

STD,

that's all a namespace where these functions are collected

inside of, these functions and containers.

Templates, of course,

inline functions,

exception handling,

overloaded operators,

extended syntax for new,

and a couple of other keywords that the STL uses, explicit and

mutable,

to help things along a bit there.

So these are stuff that the implementers use to create

the STL version that you're using.

A couple of things that I just mentioned here, the keyword

explicit.

You'll catch a warning from your compiler

if you make a one-parameter custom constructor.

You can make a default constructor, that's no

parameters, or you can make a custom constructor with more

than one parameter and not have this problem but if you make it

with just one parameter it has the ability

at the compiler space to do something like this right you

see that i've declared this feet inches that's my object and it

has a custom constructor that only includes

one parameter Make a feet inches from some integer number of

feet.

You can imagine how that works.

Three,

should be three feet zero inches.

Now, if I didn't specify this explicit keyword right here

then I could write this line here at the bottom.

that says feed inches B is equal to three.

It would say, well I've got a constructor that can turn an int

into a feed inches, I will just use that.

And so you could get into a situation where I really meant

three inches.

And the explicit is going to be a thing that sort of pushes you

away from that. So the compiler will complain

about it,

it won't want you to do that. So if you see that complaint,

Try to figure out what it means.

Just means put this explicit out in front of the single parameter

custom constructor,

yeah.

Yeah,

so it also doesn't let conversion happen

when a function expects it.

It's for preventing conversions on,

you know,

implicit conversions really is what it's there for.

And the last one here,

I think we're doing zombies,

and Dr. P told me to warn you all, if

you downloaded the project spec right at 1201,

because I know you're all like midnight go-getters.

If you downloaded it right at 1201, it was the wrong spec,

right? That didn't get updated until about 1207.

So if you were late,

you're in good shape this time. If you waited till morning, like

some normal humans,

then you got no problem. But if you were right there at

12012345, you might have got the wrong spec.

We're doing zombies this semester.

And in the zombies one,

we don't have as much need for this mutable keyword because we

use our priority queue slightly differently.

But the mutable keyword, like the explicit keyword, is a way

to break the rules. The mutable keyword says,

if you give me a constant reference to something,

but one of its members is mutable,

I can still change that member.

This is useful in a priority queue when you want to change

something that isn't related to the priority.

So let's say, for instance,

you've got a zombie on top of your priority queue.

The zombie's got some distance away from you, and it's got some

speed.

Every round,

it covers some number of feet,

meters,

distance, whatever.

When that distance is zero,

your brains get eight,

and you're dead,

right?

So if I've got these zombies in a priority queue,

obviously,

the zombie that's going to reach me first is the most important

one. that's the one I should be

trying to destroy.

You can't kill them because they're zombies,

so we don't say kill.

We gotta destroy the zombie that's going to eat your brains

first based on their distance from you and their speed.

Now, if I wanted to change the zombie's name,

their name wouldn't affect their distance or speed,

wouldn't affect the time that they would arrive to get to me.

So that would be a member variable I say, if this zombie's

name is mutable,

when I get a constant reference to one, I can still change his

name because I'm not worried about changing

the zombie's speed or distance and breaking the priority queue

because I took something that was most important and now I

made it less important and something else should be in

front of it. So that's what the mutable

keyword does. It's a rule breaker that allows

you to modify const things. things.

We talked about some generic programming early on.

You remember this piece of code down here.

We had this double pointer at a source array and another pointer

at a destination array.

Then we used this while loop here.

This is generic programming because it allows me to do

something, this algorithm here that's doing this copy from

source to destination,

it needs three things, right?

It needs something that can be dereferenced for read or write,

obviously pointer fits that.

It needs something that can be incremented,

the plus plus thing,

pointer fits that.

And it needs something that can be compared where I check this

source pointer, is it equal to the source array plus the size.

So if I can compare it,

if I can increment it, and I can dereference it,

then this copy algorithm works.

It's obviously written with C pointers.

But imagine that I used a C++ iterator.

Iterators can be dereferenced,

iterators can be incremented,

and some iterators can be compared.

If I use the right iterators, then this piece of code would

work with iterators or with pointers.

That's what makes it generic because I can go even farther

and say,

well,

I didn't say what kind of iterator because I could copy

from a vector iterator

to a deck iterator.

And so now I don't have to write a special version of this

function that says copy a vector to a deck.

I don't have to write another version that says,

copy a deck to a vector,

or another version that says, copy a deck to a deck, another

version that says, copy a deck to a linked list, a linked list

to a vector,

and so on, and so on, and so on.

And all of these can also be intertwined with C stuff.

So copy from a C style array to a vector.

I can use something like this. That's what generic programming

allows me to do.

And the STL uses generic programming so that reuse is

much easier. That's why the STL performs on

ranges and not containers. So you won't see an STL function

that says,

sort this vector.

You'll see an STL function that says, sort this range.

And you can get a range from a vector,

vector.begin, vector.end,

and then it will sort the things in the vector.

But the STL function is not tied to the container type because it

uses the generic range and that range uses iterators and uses

programming tricks like this where as long as I can

dereference,

iterate,

dereference, increment and compare then I can use this same

function over and over again and that's how the STL algorithms

library works.

It works on ranges so then I can say sort a vector,

sort a deck,

copy a vector to a and so on.

The cool part about the STL implementations are most of them

are given the best possible complexities.

That's what you have to do if you're gonna write a library.

You got to get up to that level.

Some of them have some poor performance even when they've

got a good implementation.

We talked about the link list and why we don't use it much in

281.

It's not very good at performance for the speed that

we're looking for.

Linked lists have their uses. If they didn't have a use,

no one would use them. They wouldn't exist.

So they are useful.

I'm just saying we don't use them in this course because

they're not useful to us.

So for instance, when would a linked list be useful?

Early on day one, I said,

the answer depends.

Remember that?

A lot of it depends answers. So it depends.

I can't actually use a linked list quite nicely.

When would I want to use a linked list?

Maybe I've got really large objects,

and I don't want them to move around in memory.

It's going to be easy for me to create them and hard for me to

put them into a chunk or to put ten of them into a vector, and

then when the vector grows, now I've got to copy these ten very

large memory items somewhere else so that I've got room for

20 of them.

Linkless is great for that, because I make it the one time

and it's always in that one spot in memory.

I get to the next one, it might be just a little slower, but I

don't have to do strange memory activities.

So Linkless have a reason to be used.

We just don't use one in this course.

Because the main priority of the STL is going to be time

performance.

It's hard to beat the STL for speed.

So,

the linked list is going to be as fast as it can be,

but its primary claim to fame as a linked list is not that it's

fast,

it's that it's really flexible in terms of dealing with large

items and collections and stuff like that.

So,

there's the basics of the STL.

We'll keep chugging through it throughout the semester.

We've got to learn how to use it.

So,

I will suggest some things to you on how you should do that.

But for now, let's talk about containers and iterators.

All the basic containers are available in the STL,

vector and deck,

stack and queue.

We talked about them being adapters.

Stack and queue don't really have their own code.

They've got a push and a pop,

and a front or back.

And they then call some other function.

So the way that the STL adapters work is they say, If you call my

push function,

I'm going to call push back on something else.

I'm adapting that push back to act like a stack.

So as long as that thing has a push back,

I can make a stack out of it, if it's got a pop back.

Push back, pop back, and back,

I can make a stack, and so on. So that's how some of these

containers work.

A bit vector is the same as a vector of bools.

We'll have set and multiset. We'll be talking about them a

little. We won't use them too much.

We will use some unordered things like an unordered map.

We won't use an unordered multi-map.

But there are containers that are out there that do some

pretty cool stuff.

So learning about them is gonna be useful.

You see lists there.

This is our standard doubly linked list in the STL.

If you want a singly linked list,

it's called S list.

But we won't in this semester. And then there's array,

which is kind of like a vector,

but it's fixed at compile time. So you say,

I want an array of these things of size five, and then it's a

constant.

Does stack and queue have their own iterators?

The question was, do stack and queue have their own iterators?

And the answer is no.

You can't iterate through a stack,

right? The stack allows you access to the thing that was

pushed last, That's the end,

right?

Queue allows you access to the thing that's been in there the

longest, and that's it.

So the deck allows you to kind of funk around in there if you

want to with square brackets.

So that's kind of what we did in Project 1, is we used the deck

to perform like a stack or a queue.

We didn't use the square brackets on, though, because

that was not very stack-like behavior, right?

And so,

yeah, you can't get inside of a stack or queue.

So it hides that part of the DEC interface, or the vector

interface, or the list interface.

Here are the linked list containers.

I mentioned list on the previous page, that's doubly linked.

And S list,

that's singly linked.

And you look on this far right, it says how do I get the size

from this?

And it says that under the STL specification,

the list, which is doubly linked,

has to store its size so that it's accessible in constant

time.

The singly linked list, that one's up to the implementer.

If you implement a singly linked list, an S list for your

container, the STL says we're fine with a linear counting of

those things when somebody asks for size.

Or if you choose to, you could spend the memory and give it to

them back in constant time,

that's up to you. So if you are using an S list,

for instance,

know that on some platforms your code might end up linear

and other platforms it might end up constant.

That's the kind of thing that you have to know about using a

library.

Forward list doesn't even have the ability to count size,

things like that.

All right,

back to this generalization stuff.

We're talking about iterators.

Iterators are a generalization for pointers.

And because the STL uses these iterators,

it can then use the same algorithm on multiple data

structures, because it doesn't care whether the iterator is to

a vector or to a deck, and so on.

These iterators,

typically,

we're them as doing sequential access.

There are random iterators that allow us to do math and jump in

the middle of things, but the general purpose of an iterator

is to go from this to the next to the next to the next to the

next to the next to the next.

And so when we use them,

we can get some pretty cool stuff out of it.

So for instance,

here, look at this one,

it says iterators can help writing faster code for

traversals here this R square brackets I plus

plus versus this plus plus on an iterator

so the the claim is that the one on the right here that uses the

iterators is just a little faster not so much that you

notice but over the long period you might so why is it faster

The iterator is pointing

at the thing you're looking for.

Whereas this I is the index of the thing that you're looking

for, but it's just a number.

Similarly,

R is the base address of the array, so we already saw how

this R square brackets I is really like a dereference of R

plus I, like that.

So,

every time I get what I'm looking for,

I've got to do this math.

I've got to take the base address,

add the offset.

In the situation where I've

got,

when I'm trying to get into there,

I've got to do that math to get the thing, and then I

dereference.

Whereas if the iterator is pointing right at it,

it's kind of like,

this is the base address.

I've got to add to get over here and then dereference.

The iterator, on the other hand,

is right here.

So when it comes time to dereference,

I've got it.

In both of these situations, I'm going to then plus plus

afterwards.

So I change the iterator. So afterwards,

the iterator would be here.

The next time I dereference,

I've got it. But the array would be here with

now a bigger number.

So when I say, well, dereference from the array, it says, well,

let me add five steps and then dereference.

So using iterator access is going to be faster for you than

using indices,

so that's nice.

Look at this generic print function.

This generic print function,

it takes two iterators to give us a range,

a begin and end,

and says as long as the begin does not equal to the end, I'm

going to dereference begin for reading,

print that,

and then move begin to the next thing.

That makes sense? That's a really generic thing.

But in terms of the input iterator,

I can pass anything in there now.

I can say,

vector.begin, vector.end,

pass them in there. I can say,

deq.begin, deq.end,

pass them in there.

You can say, list.begin, list.end,

pass them in there, and this one function will print all of those

things. I can even say,

give me an array,

C style array,

and then that array plus the size as my second parameter, and

this one function can print all of those things.

That's the beauty of generic programming and why iterators

are so useful in the STL.

Does that make sense? Yeah, go for it.

Class name versus type name?

No, they're totally interchangeable to my knowledge.

The question is, why is this not type name?

They're interchangeable.

So I think some of the slides do one and some of the slides do

the other.

So yeah,

it doesn't mean anything.

All right,

so what types of iterators are? I think you'll be covering some

of this in lab.

We talked about iterator types. Have you done this already?

Yeah, depends on what day you go to lab, I think.

So we use these things to access members of our container

classes.

They're like pointers. They can all be copy

constructed.

But different iterators allow you to do different things.

An input iterator, for instance, can read values and move

forward.

You can't use an input iterator to move backwards.

You can't use an input iterator to say, well, let me look at all

of those things again.

You might imagine an input iterator working through

something like keystrokes.

Unless you stored all those keystrokes somewhere,

you can't take a pointer somewhere down the line and go

back in the pointer.

So input iterators can only be read from,

can't be written to,

and they can only move forward.

They can be incremented, compared,

and dereferenced.

It's the only thing. So this is the big one right

here.

This is like 20 points on the midterm.

So,

now that you're listening,

we're going to be talking about this one problem on the midterm,

problem number 25.

It's already picked.

Problem 25 has to do with how do we implement STI,

STL style iterator based algorithms.

All right, so knowing what I can do and what I can't do with an

algorithm is important. So if I've got an input

iterator,

you see that I can increment it, I can compare it, and I can

dereference it.

But the type of comparison is important.

I cannot compare,

like, is this less than that?

All I can compare is, is this equal?

Or I can negate that and say, is this not equal?

So you'll see in the previous slide here, Look at the

comparison.

It says while begin does not equal end.

That's very specific because I can't say while began is less

than end.

Imagine,

if you will,

an iterator to an item in a linked list.

One item might be here in memory,

one item might be there in memory.

Who knows if it's less than or but the fact is it's following.

So that's why you can only compare for equal to when we say

here,

as long as begin is not equal to end,

I know that if these two iterators are in the same range,

I will eventually get to end if I keep plus-plusing begin.

And since I can only increment and I can't jump forward by 10,

there's no way for me to go from begin right before end and jump

over after end. So I don't have to worry about

the less than thing. I know that probably for loops

you were taught to use less than

That keeps you safe, right? Because you say if I'm doing

something wrong with a loop and I jump past my thing Then it'll

keep looping because I said well if I'm not equal to that and

once I'm beyond it I can't get past it.

So Iterators get used in such a way that you never have to worry

about that. So you can only compare

iterators for

equality or inequality but not for relative comparison so this

comparison is equals only or not equals

output iterators these are using for writing obviously inputs

for reading outputs for writing I can write and move forward

that's it I've got an output iterator I can't even compare an

output iterator all I can do is write at it and move it forward

right move forward right move It can only be incremented and

dereferenced.

A forward iterator is a combination there.

They can read values with forward movement,

they can be incremented, compared,

dereferenced and stored.

That's pretty good.

That's what you'll get a lot of, forward iterators or input

iterators,

and that's why you look at the code here.

Because this is templated, And we could have called this

anything.

Could have just called this T if we wanted to.

But the convention is to tell you how this iterator is

expected to behave.

It's not a guarantee that it will, but the code inside of the

function is going to be written in such a way that it only uses

the abilities of an input iterator.

So that's why it comes in here,

input iterator, as that style.

All right.

Bidirectional iterators allow us to plus-plus increment and

minus-minus decrement, so we can move back and forth with a

bidirectional iterator.

A random iterator is like a bidirectional iterator, but we

can also do addition.

So if I want to jump forward by four,

if I want to jump back by 10, I can do math with a random

iterator.

It doesn't give me random things again.

It allows me to choose randomly from what I want.

And then there's a reverse iterator, which is an adapter

that's pretty slick,

the random iterator or bidirectional iterator that it

comes from allows us to plus plus

and move in reverse.

That's what a reverse iterator does.

So you can imagine how,

as we talked about this generic print things, but what if I

wanted to print these things out in a reverse order?

I wanted to do a for each. That's a great thing that runs

through a range of iterators. What if I wanted to work on this

in reverse order?

Should I write a reverse for each function?

Or if I just take reverse iterators,

every time I start at the end and plus,

plus, plus, plus, plus, plus, plus,

plus,

I work my way to the beginning and I don't have to write a

separate function for doing it. So that's why reverse iterators

are pretty cool.

Yeah.

Why do we split the functions of like input iterators and output

iterators?

Why the difference between input and output iterators?

Well, we're definitely going to be reading from and writing two

things at different times, right?

And depending on what you're getting,

like for instance, if I'm saying this iterator stream is pulling

off of a keyboard, I don't want anyone to think at some point

later, I can write to that stream.

And so that's why you say, well, this one is definitely

locked down to just taking input or just taking output.

So in some situations,

it's because of what you're dealing with that you have, that

you have to keep your activities limited.

All right, we talked about ranges.

The STL lets us call these functions here, begin,

end,

cbegin,

cend, rbegin,

rend.

Every container in the STL has those.

Go for it.

Yeah.

If you call like begin on an iterator,

you're talking about?

That's?

Standard iterator,

that's kind of the depending on how you use it.

The compiler will make some of those decisions for you right if

you go in and look up.

Right here's talking about the types of iterators and what they

can do, But if you're talking about something like a vector,

Vector.

So it doesn't discuss what type of iterator that it's going to

show you here.

It can tell you that you can get a const iterator if you ask for

one.

But the compiler tends to know it looks in the code and see

what you're going to do with it.

And then if you're going to be writing to it, it'll get you the

proper iterator.

So it's not something that you have to worry about too much.

I mean, basically, that's really the answer that you're looking

for is you don't have to know really what you're going to get.

But if you are writing some stuff, if you have to know what

you're expected to be able to do.

So like in this slide here, where I said it says this is

going to be an input iterator, I know that I better not try to

write to that.

That's really the best way that you can behave with them.

All right, so all the containers support ranges.

And so you can ask for a container.begin

here, and it will give you an iterator to the beginning.

Begin is getting an iterator to the beginning, end is going to

use the STL convention of giving you the end

as just past good data.

Similar to the way that our indexing math works,

if I've got four items in my vector and I ask for begin,

the first will be pointing

at

the after the fourth item.

So technically,

end will be pointing at square brackets four,

which will be out of bounds,

which is why you should never ever ever dereference an end

iterator,

because an end iterator is always pointing just past good

data.

That's why the comparison says as long as the iterator that I'm

looking at is not equal to the end iterator, then I can

dereference it.

While begin does not equal end,

dereference and then move begin forward.

That's what we saw.

So these ranges,

begin and end,

give me two iterators that I can use like that.

You see the next two,

cbegin and cend,

they work on the exact same range,

but they're a constant iterator, meaning you can't change the

thing that's being pointed And then r-begin and r-end are how I

get a reverse iterator set.

So the r-begin is pointing at the last item,

and you plus,

plus, plus, plus, plus, plus until you get to the first item

and then quit after that.

Begin is always inclusive,

end is always exclusive. So we'll be talking about this

half open range. If you remember,

in math, you can kind of write that thing like this.

The half-open range,

which means I will hit zero,

and if my range goes up to four here, then the numbers that I

would be able to include are zero,

one,

two,

and three.

So if my range looks like zero comma four in this half-open

one, It means it starts at 0,

goes up 2, but does not include 4.

And that's how the end iterator works on these ranges.

All right.

All the iterator functions in the STL, they're all

range-based. They're not container-based.

So you can see here,

this is just an example of grabbing some iterators and

using some basic STL functions.

This one uses the STL's copy function, and it also uses the

STL's sort function.

Those are both found in algorithm.

You see it included here in line two.

And then we go through here, and what do we do? In line seven, we

make a vector of integers.

In line eight,

we make an array of integers.

Yeah,

you don't want to dereference it, so it's before your memory

range. It would be before it would be a

basic that square brackets negative one if that was a

thing.

At the last one yep so you'll be pointing at and live data begin

will always get you live data our begin will get you live data

yep yep all right so

vector of integers in seven C style

array of integers in eight both of them are size n

we fill the vector with a bunch of negative ones here the we

didn't we don't have a simple way to do that so we just let it

be full of junk in lines 10 and 11 what happens there we just

generate something that looks like random ish data it's just j

cubed mod n and I don't know it's pretty nonsensical but the

point is we're gonna try to sort this or copy it but this is how

we fill what we put stuff in the vector V at

J we put

So we've got these integers inside of v.

In line 12 here,

you see, what do we do? We copy from the beginning of v,

all the way up to the end of v,

and write that information.

The third parameter in the copy statement tells you where to put

the data.

You see here,

I'm writing to the C-style array.

This is where the generic programming is working, right?

Because this first parameter is an iterator.

second parameter is an iterator and the third parameter is a C

pointer but the STL copy function works because the C

pointer can be dereferenced to write at it it can be

incremented and that's all the copy needs from its

output from its input we have to be able to dereference it to

read it we have to be able to increment it to go to the next

one but we also have to be able to compare two of them to say,

when should I stop?

There's no stopping at writing. There's only stopping at

reading.

So then you look at the version in line 13.

What does line 13 do?

Line 13 says, well, I can take this C pointer as the beginning

of my range because I can dereference a pointer.

I can compare a pointer. And I can increment a pointer.

So this generic copy function from the STL here in 12 copied

from vector to C style array here in 13 copies from a C-style

array back to vector.

And I could put DEC in there or any other thing that I can get a

range on. I can copy from a C-style array

to a doubly linked list if I put those iterators in there in that

way.

And that's what the generic programming is about here.

In line 14 and 15, we're also being able to sort these things,

right?

The sort takes two iterators where things start, and just

after things end,

also known as .begin and .end,

if we're talking about containers.

Does that make sense?

Does this raise any questions?

Yeah.

So to sort in reverse order, would you just use rbegin and

rend?

Question is, to sort in reverse order, would I use rbegin and

rend?

I believe that would work,

right? The other way you can sort in reverse order is you can

add a third parameter here to tell you how to compare things.

And so the default comparison is standard less.

If I put in a standard greater there, then it's going to give

me a reverse item sort as well.

They said we're both copy-ads,

so the first parameter is inclusive of the second.

Yes,

everything in the STL, when it's talking about a range, is always

inclusive-exclusive.

Everything.

All ranges, whether it's copy function,

or some other constructor,

or the sort function, or anything that the STL does in

range,

we're pointing at good data, and we're stopping just past good

data.

This version uses C++ 14 edition.

It's the exact same stuff in there.

You'll see, though,

how I get my iterators is slightly different.

Now I'm calling this standard begin function,

whereas on the previous slide I was calling vector.begin.

See it?

And 12 there,

v.begin.

And 12 here, it's begin of v.

So all this does is unifies our

syntax.

Because v.begin and begin of v aren't much

different.

Neither is end of v and v.end.

But before, we were just using a.

Now I can use begin at a and get myself an iterator that

matches that pointer.

That's really what's going on there.

So this is the more common syntax to use.

It is one less character,

if you like it.

So type's just a little faster.

But it is more consistent here. You see,

everything looks the same, whether I'm talking about this

vector beginning

or this array beginning,

array beginning,

vector beginning. You say, well, how do you know

where does an array end?

Because I understand being able to call n on a vector, but I

don't necessarily understand

how to be able to call n on a C-style array.

Well, it has to be done in the right context.

So in this particular function when I ask for the end of a the

compiler is able to say well Where does they come from?

I know what a is a is of type int Square bracket size n so the

compiler can tell you where end is here if I were to just pass

in some pointer

To an array and say give me the end on that that wouldn't be

compilable It has to be in the context and you see here because

a is in the context of this function and I can call end of a

and it will actually figure out where a plus n is.

It's, it has to be in a context where it can discover it, right?

It's not going to intuit it, it's not going to assume that it

knows what it is, it has to know what it is, right? If the type

is passed in as a square bracketed type you could

actually do that as a variable, as you know, as a parameter, But

you have to be passing that in with size at compile time.

So not something you really have to worry about.

If that's a bit confusing to you,

just know that as long as the compiler can tell what our size

actually is at compile time,

then we can use end on A.

Usually arrays decay into pointers

when you need to get their R values.

Yes.

What's the type of the variable that's going inside of n when

it's passing?

The question is about array to pointer decay, which has gotta

be one of the most complicated things in all of C++,

but in reality,

because of where this is,

a is not a pointer.

It can decay to a pointer.

But what a is,

is an array of size n.

That's the type of a. So that's why when it can tell

here that a is of type array size n.

Oh Obviously, I know where end is then it's just that a plus n.

So that's that's really what it is.

It doesn't go to that's why I'm saying if you just to pass in a

pointer and Wouldn't know what to do with it because a pointer

doesn't have size in it Even though we think of arrays as

being pointers. They aren't really pointers.

They just can decay to pointers. And so So, that's why really A

there isn't a pointer.

It's really an array of size N.

That's the type of A.

And that's why it works.

Yeah.

On a vector or on the array?

Okay. Well, it's different on the

vector because begin and end,

standard begin and standard end,

they say, hey, you're calling this on some container that has

its own dot begin function.

So the standard begin,

when you call it on a vector,

gets forwarded to vector dot begin.

So it actually ends up just exactly like the other slide,

it's just written slightly differently,

right?

On the,

on the array here,

then it's like we were talking about, in that context it needs

to know what that actual type is.

If that type isn't something that it can intuit at compile

time, then it won't be able to call end on it.

All right.

When do we not use iterators?

You might be saying, well,

I can just template some containers if I want to, can I?

I don't feel like doing this begin end thing.

Well,

C++ 20 is coming to rescue you. We will be able to call range on

containers in the future. but for now not so much

so if I try to do it myself look at here

we said I'm gonna template on this container so maybe I can

say I'll just pass in I want to be able to print some stuff from

a from a vector I'll pass that and that's what's gonna be

templated there you see that I've got this container type C

const reference there and then I'll just call begin on C inside

the function this ends up with some compiler ambiguities

so that's why it's got the big X on it on the slide there you

don't want to do this the only way that you're gonna get this

to work properly at all situations is if you declare one

for a particular type here and so to clean this up to fix

the ambiguity you really want to do one where you just pass in

the container,

then you've got to write it like this.

Here, I say I'm templating on the class T.

And T is not the container now, but it's the thing in the

container.

Looking at the second parameter there, you see I'm taking a

vector of those Ts.

So this function is still a bit generic.

It's not written for a vector of integers or a vector of doubles.

It'll work with a vector of anything.

But what's not so great about it is it only does vectors.

So if I want to write one of these that does DEC,

then I have to write a separate function to do DEC,

right, or a separate function to do list.

That's what taking the iterators out of it, taking the range away

from it does. It limits some of our generic

usage.

When I keep it as a range,

then I could write this function once and work on all my

containers.

But if I want to be able to pass in a container, then I have to

write a function for that container.

So this is better,

but like it says here, you need multiple versions for each one

of your containers.

So not so great.

All right, memory allocation and initialization.

As we look at putting things into a container,

we've got the vector data structure, which is pretty

compact.

It's got three pointers,

really.

That's what makes up a vector.

A pointer to where the data begins,

a pointer to where the data ends,

and then a pointer to where the memory ends.

So if I've got room for 20 of them here, I've got this,

that,

and then this point in the middle that's pointing at one.

So that's all it takes to make a vector, so that's why even an

empty vector is going to cost you 24 bytes.

It's got three pointers in it. And then there's going to be

some memory on the heap somewhere else where it's

getting at them.

The list is not very compact because it's got those double

pointers, the previous pointer, next pointer, so it's got 16

extra bytes of memory per item.

And then we'll be talking about the unordered map in the second

half, which is a bit of a memory hog, but it does one of the

things that we do on a regular basis.

It trades space for speed.

I'm going to use a bunch of space and I'll give you speed

for it.

You want this to be a little bit smaller, you might have to go a

little bit slower.

So we trade off in a lot and in the other map you can see that

pretty obviously.

Hopefully this stuff here is old news for you.

This is about resizing a vector.

By the end of P1 we should have mastered this, right?

So here's one way to do it. a two-dimensional array of size

10,

each one of those things having 20 negative ones in it.

So here we declare one, set its size to 10 at declaration time,

which gives me 10 empty vectors.

Then I've got this loop that goes through each one of those

10 vectors and sets it equal to something new of size 20.

So that's one way to do it.

This version creates 20 vectors.

See it?

In line one, we create 10 vectors.

And then in line three,

I create a new vector 10 times and assign one of my old vectors

to one of those.

So this is probably less efficient,

right?

This is creating 20 vectors to get 10.

So okay, well this version says,

what if I were just to create the 10 in line one And then

instead of overwriting the ones that are size 0,

I will resize each one of them to be 20.

So both of these do the same thing.

This one creates 20 vectors. This one creates 10.

You only use 10 of them, but you create and throw some away.

And then this bottom version is the, this is the plus up way to

do this, right?

See how at declaration time, I say I'm gonna give 10 of these

things. That's what every time you do a

size and something. So this is going to be 20 of

these things. So I've got 20 negative ones in

this vector. Now in this two-dimensional

array,

I've got 10 of these things, which is just another vector of

size 20 of these things.

And so with this one line,

I can get myself a nice 10 by 20 set of negative ones.

Yeah.

That's a good question, I'm not sure exactly how the mechanics

on that work.

I know that it's going to be,

you know,

in the end it's going to be 200 copies of that,

that negative one. If I were to ask for,

if this were not integers and some objects,

it would be calling the default constructor on each one of them.

So they do get created.

So that's really how it's gonna go off in there.

Each one of them gets assigned a negative one there.

So in the end, it's about the same amount of work.

The memory goes and gets got and then each thing is initialized.

In the case of just integers, we're setting each one of them

to negative one.

All right.

So I mentioned earlier the standard vector's memory

overhead. It's these three pointers where

the memory begins, where the memory ends, and where the data

ends.

Or,

to be more precise,

it's going to be just

past...

things like that. So if this is my last thing

right here,

the last piece of data, so in this case, you might say this

looks like a capacity,

and I'm imagining things,

capacity of 20,

size 10.

That's what that vector looks like there to me.

So the last thing,

this would be, you know, sort of at square brackets nine, and

then my end pointer would be here at 10.

10

It's just past good data

The begin pointer of course is gonna be pointing at square

brackets zero

So you can think of this as zero and really

You can think of this as 20

So that's what the three back the three pointers in a vector

are

One of the things that you didn't have to worry too much

about in this project p1 because p1 was just two-dimensional We

couldn't really get around that. But you can still,

two-dimensional and square.

So here's where knowing what I'm doing can help me out.

So if every vector is 24 bytes,

imagine I've gotta represent 10 million items in

memory.

Not too hard.

Which is gonna use more memory? Ten vectors of size one million

or a million vectors of size ten?

It's not even close, right?

Ten vectors,

each vector being 24 bytes, is 240 bytes.

So if they've got a million things in them, the data is

always going to take the data space, but the overhead from the

containers matters.

So if I've one outer vector so that's a two-dimensional vector

right I put that in air quotes so a two-dimensional vector is

just some vector that holds some stuff in it and if each one of

those things is another vector that's kind of what I'm looking

at so in my 10 by a million case then

I've got 11 vectors the outer vector for 24 bytes and then

the 10 inner vectors for 240 bytes or 264 bytes total

right if I go the other route though I've got a million

vectors and each one of them holds ten things I still have

all of the data memory that I need I still hold ten million

things but now I've got a million and one vectors so I can

think of this as two six that's two four oh oh

oh two four bytes right

and that's just overhead that's not data so the order that I put

my indices in is very important and the way that you want to do

that is to put them in this

increasing order here a smaller than b smaller than c so

like for instance in another project one that you didn't do

that would be multiple levels we'll say there's only ten

levels as many as ten levels but the maps can sort of be on

unlimited so how do you want to do that you don't want to have

your row column first you want to have your map size first if

there's ten of them then there's my ten outer vectors at most and

that holds a bunch of stuff whereas if my Map size was 200

by 200. I wouldn't want 200 outer

vectors

So that's what this is talking about here that you should sort

them in the order of increasing because this is the three

pointers for my outer vector and

Then there's three times a pointers for my inner vector and

three times a times B for my inner Inner vectors and that's

what we're talking about in terms of pointers

The first case because I've got an outer vector that's 24 bytes

and then 240 on the 10 that are inside yep

all right so

and and then this this bottom one is kind of a small caveat to

say or you can always ensure constant space overhead by just

doing arithmetic indexing so I had some people that We're very

attached to trying to do that in P1.

So I'm just going to do this whole map as a 1D vector.

And then I will do the arithmetic indexing to figure

out what rows and columns worked.

And that's another way to do it.

And I think there were a couple of people that I remember

working with,

one that just could not get things to work in time doing

that indexing, and another that did.

So it's not necessarily indexing that was a problem.

But it's a thing that you can do.

is doing that one-dimensional array indexing, would that be

slower than having a multi-dimensional array? The

question is,

is a one-dimensional array slower than a multi-dimensional

array?

And when you're in multi-dimensions,

every time you go into a row and then into its column, you've got

two memory accesses. So when I'm doing the

single-dimensional array,

all my code looks a lot junkier because I'm doing math all over

the place that the compiler would have done for me if I had

used a syntactic sugar or square brackets,

but I am using fewer memory accesses, so it's a strange kind

of trade-off.

Most cases,

you're way fine with just doing the two-dimensional version, and

then your code reads easier, writes easier, you think about

it less, and it gets done faster with fewer bugs.

It's only when you get into some really small performance

situations, like I've got an embedded system, and I got less

memory, or I got less power, or whatever that you really wanna

start playing with things like that.

All right,

end of STL containers and iterators.

How am I still far behind?

Still far behind.

All right,

functors and lambdas.

We know what a functor is?

We do know what a functor is, right?

Functor is just an object that behaves like a function.

Here's one for instance,

this struct sort by name.

The way you get an object to behave like a function is you

give it an overloaded operator parentheses.

So you see here, this one has in line two, it's got some operator

parentheses.

This is a specific kind of functor.

This is a functor that we think of as using to do some

comparison.

So we've got a bunch of name overlap, and it's all just

nicknames and cheap ways to say things.

So function object, that's one way to say it.

We say short version of that is functor,

right?

When I've got a functor that's gonna do some comparisons,

also known as a binary predicate,

I'll call that a comparator.

So a binary predicate function object,

it's a lot of stuff to say there, It's also just a

comparator.

So in this case, you see I'm taking two employees,

constant references to them anyways.

I take two employees and compare them, and I'm going to return my

answer as a Boolean. That's what a predicate function

is.

Here's a question, give me yes or no.

So this binary predicate takes two things and compares them.

And in the STL, it wants all of those things to behave like

less.

So if I was looking at these two employees, In this case, this

comparison is saying,

which one of these should have the smallest name?

This would be useful for sorting them

in increasing order by name. And so this one says, I'll use

this like less.

So this is what a functor looks like.

This is what a comparator looks like.

This is what a function object looks like.

What's the benefit of using these versus function pointers?

The question is, what's the benefit between using these and

function pointers From a coding standpoint,

nothing really.

They behave the same.

Function pointers are a whole lot harder syntax to work with.

But function pointer and a functor work the same.

Make sense?

So it says up there, don't overload operator less than.

You could if I wanted to sort these employees I say well if I

just wanted to see if this employee was less than that

employee if I overloaded operator less than less than

function would work.

The problem with that is it works but it limits you.

So what if I wanted to sort employees by name I get overload

operator less than then I wanted to sort them somewhat later by

salary less than wouldn't work for me because it's still be

sorting by name and I'd have to write a func door that helps me

sort by name one that or one that helps me sort by salary or

seniority or whatever it is. And so the convention is just

write a functor and then use it where you need it.

Don't use less than unless there's an obvious one way to

compare a certain thing, and that's when we're going to

overload less than.

So here,

we talked about sort a few pages ago.

You can see I'm being able to sort some employees here in a

range from the beginning of that employee list to the end of that

employee list,

and then I can add a third parameter to the sort, as I

mentioned,

and this third parameter is this function object,

this func door, this thing that says,

here's an employee, here's an employee, which should go first?

True if this one should go first.

False if the second one should go first.

That's how the STL sort is written.

Go for it.

So you're talking about tiebreaker,

like,

I want to sort you by name, I say, well, if you've got the

same last name,

then I'm going to sort you by your first name, if you've got

the same first name, maybe I'll pick some other tiebreaker.

That's all about whatever that thing does.

Because in the end,

all it has to do is return true or false.

It doesn't matter why it returns true or false, right? it could

be just based on one name and return true or false.

Or it could say when the names are tied, then I go to this

other decision to make whether I'm going to return true or

false.

Does that make sense?

So it's in the comparator that that implementation happens is

when you can make that decision.

So this is what a functor looks like.

I need an object here,

sort by name is a type.

And if I take this type and put parentheses on it,

I get an object.

So that's what I need in this third parameter.

Iterator,

iterator,

object.

Here you see I've got a priority queue that's being declared.

And the priority queue, if I'm going to use my own comparison,

I've got to give it three things at templating time.

What goes in the container,

employees.

what the priority queue holds them in, a vector of employees,

and then what is the type of object that will be doing my

comparison. So you see a little bit of

difference here.

This version is in a function call.

It needs an object.

This is at a template definition level.

It needs a class or a type.

All right,

it's our walking minute, Unless there's any other questions

Let's walk

I have a question about this.

I'm kind of just wondering what about it,

which part makes it hard?

Why is it like a struct for,

like,

yeah, why can't it just be like,

what does it need to stick to?

It has this overloaded part,

right?

So it's got this overloaded operator frame.

So that means basically if I've got some struct S,

right,

I can do this.

And the compiler knows what to do,

right?

If I've got some struct that doesn't have an overlaid

operator, parentheses,

like for instance, you know, I had my location,

which had a row and a column,

right? If I had one of those and I said,

let me take L and I'll put parentheses on it,

it would say, I don't know how to do that anymore.

I don't know any way to do that.

If it had an overloaded operator parentheses,

then the compiler would say, oh, I know what you want to do.

You want me to call this function.

So when you're doing this,

it's the iterative act of parentheses?

Like what does it actually do?

Like what does it compile into?

It's calling this function in that context.

Where this is equal to pass,

if I've got data,

then it has to let you pass. Oh, okay, okay, okay, okay.

Yeah.

Okay.

Yep.

I'm not fully convinced on how end works,

because what I learned is when you pass an array into a

function,

by default,

it's gonna decay

into a pointer,

and then you lose the side. Absolutely,

and so if you pass it into a function, you can't call in them

because it doesn't have signs.

That's what I'm saying is you have to, the one that we had, it

was declared in that context.

Yeah, so right here,

a is an array, not a pointer.

That's correct.

But when I point it, when I pass it into end itself,

end is taking in a parameter,

right?

So this parameter,

the type of the parameter itself will decay into a point,

but it gets passed into a function.

Well, the end function knows how to deal with that, right? The

end function knows how to deal with an integer of type,

sorry,

an array of type,

an array of size n.

It says, OK, well, I can make that work.

I mean,

I saw some lines that were like

this.

I was in public, right?

Because I got a way you could pass an array by reference.

It's like you'll have to show the side of your code.

Right, yeah.

Correct.

So how can it do this with the size of that thing?

Because it knows what it's type is,

when the compiler is passing that on to X,

it knows.

It does have that information.

You're correct.

So if you use that kind of like...