making random test files. I thought that was really
helpful.
I think for P2, though, I'll keep talking about P2.
Absolutely.
It's really large numbers of randomly generated time that's
been around, or five rounds that's been around, and so on,
and so on. Thank you.
Yeah, that was a good one there. Question was, should we do
something with those randomly generated input files, like I
suggested on P1,
so you can really get some larger tests?
And that's a great thing. This one's got a built-in P2
random thing going on with it, right?
So you can pretty easily generate 5,000 zombies in a
round,
in 10 rounds of that, to really get to the point where your
comparator is seeing all different tie breaks that
it might see in terms of who's got the most hit points or who's
closest or who's got the best name or whatever
it takes to get those tie breaks really thoroughly checked out.
Obviously,
you're not going to know what the right answer is unless you
get some of that to trigger on the autograder.
But you can get some larger tests to see what's going on
there.
Definitely give that a run. And you can augment that with
generating a bunch of random zombies along with some really
targeted named zombies. That's why the whole setup is
the way it is. You put some targeted named
zombies in there so that you have some specific values that
you're trying to see how they go in the priority queue.
So definitely push your code as hard as you can.
The same thing is true with part 2B.
In 2B, there's a test PQs file that comes with it
that's very,
very light.
There's almost no testing in it whatsoever.
It's not really there for a testing, though.
It's there to make it easier for you to write tests, because some
of the stuff might not be as clear when you're dealing with
what we're dealing with in P2B, with templated code,
with polymorphic code, with templated polymorphic code.
So that test PQs thing is really, really meant for you
to add some tests to it.
Try some stuff. Push your priority queues and
see what you can do with it. Same thing there if you want to
add some random number generation to just a bunch of
testing there.
It's a great way to do it.
I mean, it's a pretty simple test.
You can say, give me 5,000 numbers.
And then you just keep popping them off.
And if ever the number goes up,
then you know it's broken,
right? So you don't even have to do a whole lot of work on it.
You know what's gonna come out, the most important thing, then
the next most, then the next most, the next most, and you can
try that with a reversed
or a greater than style comparator so that you can see
things go in the opposite direction so definitely add
testing to everything.
Everything, everything, everything should be tested.
That's how I code all the time. I take the smallest part that I
can write, see if I can get it written, and then test it and
test it and test it. As I integrate it back into the
hole, I know that my problems can only be at the integration
space,
not at the real workspace.
And so when you get those large chunks of code tested and you
know that they're perfect,
for instance, if you wrote the median
in a separate file, in a separate class,
and it's just like a normal container, except it really only
has two primary methods. There's insertion and
inspection.
You don't even need size or you can add those things,
metrics,
but you don't need a removal operator for your median queue.
And then the same sort of thing. You say,
well,
I can scramble up these one through 50
and I know what the median is regardless of what order they go
in.
So I write a 10,000 times loop and every time through that loop
it scrambles all those numbers and then inserts them and then
pops them all out.
Oh, sorry, wrong problem.
Inserts them all and then checks the median and tells me if I got
the right median so they can get every possible ordering that you
might,
far more than you could think of, let's put it that way.
And then just implement that with large scale testing.
Then when you know that,
you know that your median queue is working perfectly.
Then if you got the wrong answer on the project, you know it has
nothing to do with how you calculate median,
it's just what values you're calculating median with.
And so that's the way I code.
It seems like it might take a little bit longer as you write
tests, and you go back and test things.
But it really takes less time, because with less debugging,
you're wasting less time. The programming is the fast
part. It goes quick.
So if you're writing stuff that then works,
testing it is not that much work.
So that's why the makefile works the way it does.
If you name any file test blah blah blah dot cpp,
the makefile knows how to make a separate executable for just
that thing. So I would do sort of like a
median queue dot hpp
and build my median queue in there and then write a test
median dot cpp.
And then it would have its own main, not the main to go with
the project, but I could keep it all in the folder.
Anything that I wanted to do, I say, OK, well, let me just build
the zombies and then stick a bunch of zombies in something
and test zombie.
And when I'm sure that they go into the priority queue and come
out of the priority queue like I like,
then testzombie.cpp is no longer that important for
me. I just can start ignoring it.
But then I know the PQs that I use in the simulation,
they never get it wrong.
So
it's not exactly test-driven development.
That's a style of programming that if you haven't heard about
TDD, you might want to look into it.
Not everybody does it, but it's got some really good tenants to
it, where you're really trying to test, test, test
to support your development.
All right, let's get into work here.
We were on beans, right?
Yeah, we were talking beans.
Is that where we stopped?
Oh, yeah, there we go.
OK, and these slides are,
there we go.
Got through there, got through there.
Yeah, we stopped on this slide right here.
And all this was a combination of calling
lower bound when what you were looking for was there and when
you were looking, what you were looking for was not there to see
how it responded.
As well with upper bound,
calling it with something that exists in the container and then
calling it with something that doesn't exist in the container.
So we said the lower bound is the first thing,
not less than what you're looking for.
So if it's there, what you're looking for,
you find it. If they're in order, the first
thing not less than what you're looking for is the thing you're
looking for. And if there's multiple copies
of it even,
the first thing not less than what you're looking for is the
first of those,
which is important as well.
Right, if there's five threes, I don't get the middle three or
the last three.
Lower bound gets the first three.
Similarly, upper bound is the first thing greater than what
you're looking for. So if what you're looking for is
there, it will not return that.
It will do like a normal STL range does though and give you
the iterator to just past your good data.
This is great because you can combine lower bound and upper
bound to find what's known as an equal range.
So if there's a bunch of threes,
lower bound will point at the first one, and then upper bound
will point just past the last one and so then if you wanna
process that as a range,
there you go, those two iterators process that range of
threes.
So,
what's the difference between calling with the begin function
in this way and using it as the member function of the vector.
So the vector versus standard begin.
So vector begin versus standard begin.
So this slide uses standard begin.
Notice how it's got begin of v instead of v.begin.
So standard begin will forward the call onto the container if
the container has its own begin.
So in this case, there's no difference whatsoever.
If we use something that doesn't have a .begin,
in, then this will wrap it and try to put an iterator on it.
So you can use this in a C-style pointer
or any one of those containers that we would be using.
So yeah.
And it's one character less,
like that matters.
How critical about return random iterators?
They do not return random iterators.
It depends on the container, right? Not all containers
support a random iterator.
so typically upper and lower bound will give you forward
iterators I believe
forward iterators I'd have to look into that though I always
end up using them
roughly the way they should be so I don't know too much you
know what I mean it's like you don't try to do the wrong thing
with them you don't actually have to know what the right
thing is so somehow you figure out how to not do the wrong
thing though I don't know where that came from but Yeah,
I think it's a forward iterator.
All right, so if seven is there, obviously our binary search is
gonna hop around and find the seven on lower bound.
26 is not there, so our binary search is gonna hop around and
find the first thing larger than 26,
first thing not less than 26, I should say.
And the upper bound is gonna not find the 21
because it's gotta find the first thing larger than the 21
and so we end up with 25 even when the 21 is there then if I'm
looking for four which is not there the first thing that is
greater than four is that five so that's how lower bound and
upper bound work and the bounds and the binary search anything
else on that rockin lower bound is your friend you should be
using lower bound in the sorted PQ that's gonna to tell you
where to insert the thing. Think about it.
If I'm trying to insert a six into a container
that has a seven in it,
but no six,
lower bound is gonna find that seven for me,
and then I would insert the six right in front of it.
And that's great,
right?
If it finds another six in there,
the first thing not less than that, I can insert it in front
of that six and be in good shape.
Two sixes next to each other.
So the insertion point using standard insert or vector insert
is at the lower bound location.
All right,
sets a little bit. We'll kind of breeze through
these.
This is like, you know, sets from math.
You know, sets, intersection,
union,
that sort of stuff. We've got all of those things in
the STL,
Intersection, Union,
Set difference,
which is in one set but not the other.
The Symmetric difference,
which is also known as XOR.
Symmetric difference is in one but not the other.
We know how to add things, check to see if they're an element,
see if it's empty.
So the STL supports a bunch of this stuff.
But the way that we're going to do this is we're going to
implement a set because what we really want to know is very
easily if what we're looking for is a member of the set.
That's really what sets are good for.
do I know if this belongs or doesn't?
And a really easy way to do that is with a searchable container,
I can just go look for it and find it.
That's great, we'll see how efficient we can make that.
Let's look at setUnion though.
setUnion is an STL function,
and this is very important,
very important.
This is 20 points on the exam right now.
This is problem 25. so problem 25 on the midterm
exam is the STL question so it won't be set union
unfortunately it'd be really easy if it was but it will be
something like set union there's a whole section of functions in
the algorithm library these modifying and non modifying
sequence functions that work on a range in linear time and
constant space and do something this case it works on two sets
in linear time and creates the union of those two sets.
And what's the union?
That's every item that's in one of those two sets
in a new set.
Just like a normal set union.
If it's in A, put it in there. If it's in B, put it in there.
But we only need to put it in there once because sets don't
really deal with duplicates.
All right?
Yeah.
Yeah,
keeping it sorted makes our life really easy.
So, if you want to do this set stuff, these set functions are
going to assume that the range that you give it is a sorted
range.
And we'll see how that makes our life really easy.
That keeps us at linear time instead of needing to do
quadratic time.
Because imagine if I've got two lists of things and they're in
no order whatsoever.
To find out if this thing from list one is in list two,
I've got to look at everything in list two to find it.
So, if I want to check all of the things in list one to see if
all of them are in list two,
that's n squared behavior, and I don't really like that if I
don't have to.
Now,
if they're sorted like these two sets,
set one,
Amy, Beth,
Brian,
Dan, Emily, and Frank,
set two, Amy,
Blake,
Bob, and Brian,
we've got some arrows in there to point us towards
what our iterators are going to be passed into the set union
function. It takes, the basic version,
takes five inputs,
right? And that is the beginning and end of set one,
my blue arrows here,
and the beginning and end of set two, my red arrows,
and the beginning of where I can write the answer to.
That's my one green arrow.
Remember, I don't need a second green arrow.
Why? Well,
the green arrow in this slide is representing an output iterator.
And remember,
output iterators can't be compared.
So if I were to say, hey, well, that green one should stop down
here, how would I ever even know?
I can't take that green one and compare it to this one.
It just doesn't work.
You cannot compare output iterators.
So there's no need to say where I should stop.
Okay, well, how do I stop from going out of bounds? How do I
stay inside my segment?
Well,
that's not set union's problem.
Set union says, you're going to give me these five iterators,
two for where I start data,
two for where I start data, and one for where I start output.
And you better make sure that there's enough room to write
everything that I might possibly write
at the end of that green arrow.
So what do I need here?
My calling function could say, well, there's six things on the
left, there's four things on the right.
In the worst case,
they could all be unique,
and we'd need 10 things in the output.
So that's the calling function's responsibility.
It says, okay, well,
when you get this green output iterator to write things that
you're going to pass in there as an argument,
you better make sure that there's room for 10 things,
at least 10 things, because we know that this could, in the
worst case,
write 10 things. So if you pass me a green
iterator to four things and I got this kind of data going on,
there's no way I'm going to survive that, right? I'm just
gonna go off the end and things are gonna be terrible so it's
the calling functions
Responsibility to make sure that there's enough room at the end
of green
How do we communicate though the calling function says do this
thing for me
The called function still has to respond a little bit right
obviously has to make The intersected set.
I'm sorry the union set, but it also has to tell Well,
the calling function,
well, I'm happy that you gave me room for ten of these things,
but I really only filled eight of them.
That message has to go back to the calling function because the
calling function may imagine calling function said, well,
give me a vector with ten things and then do the set intersection
or set union.
Like,
does the calling function know that these last two are garbage?
It has no idea that they're garbage.
unless the called function says hey you told me to do this union
and I stopped right here then the calling function can say
great I'm just going to erase this and now I've got the answer
erase doesn't really get rid of it in memory but it it lets the
vector know that its capacity may be 10 but its size of real
data is only 8 so that's what the return is so this is This is
super important because the function that you will have to
write for problem 25 from the STL,
the way that we give you the problem is we erase the name of
the function and then give you actual STL documentation and say
write this function with everything but the name of the
function.
So if you understand the style of STL iterator-based
linear sequence operations,
then you won't make the mistakes that cost you points.
It's like a four point deduction for improper iterator usage.
What is that?
Like dereferencing end.
If you ever do that,
it's terrible.
And it's also terrible on the exam.
If you dereference end,
there's four points off for sure,
right?
If you say,
well,
what if I take this iterator and add four to it.
Well,
the problem gives you forward iterators,
and adding four to an iterator is a random iterator behavior,
and that's also illegal.
It's also worth four points that you won't ever see.
So,
what is it that we can do? We know that we can take forward
iterators,
input iterators, and output iterators, so we know that we
can take,
I think you get two forward iterators and an output
iterator,
or sorry,
for this problem you'd have four forward iterators and one
output-out iterator.
So,
how can I compare forward iterators?
I can't say, well,
is begin less than end?
That's an invalid comparison.
They can be compared, but only for equality.
So,
you have to learn this style because those simple things,
which would lead to a normally logical good solution,
do not work with iterators. Iterators can be incremented,
compared,
and dereferenced.
Forward iterators,
that's it.
And the comparison has to be equal or not equals only.
Output iterators can be incremented and dereferenced,
and that's it.
So if you mess that up,
you will lose points unnecessarily.
You can copy forward iterators, but not input iterators.
You can copy forward iterators, but not input iterators.
Correct.
That's worth noting. I think you're going to get
forward iterators on this problem.
Well,
when you see the code,
this one sort of says that they're in iterators.
You see how that is up there in line one?
So that's the author sort of telling you how those things
should behave.
I mean, it's not a guarantee, obviously,
from the code. But that's how you get that
information.
And also, in the documentation for the actual stuff, it'll tell
you what you have.
Yeah?
So you say you can only check out integers based on things,
but would it be the six-parameter in the function?
That would be the six-parameter version.
So if I was trying to do a set union with things is that the
compiler didn't know how to compare.
In this case, I'm doing with strings,
and strings have an overloaded less than operator,
so it works just fine. But if I was to do this with
zombies and I was trying to get a set of zombies,
I would have to give it some other comparator in the sixth
parameter that behaved just like less.
And then it would work just great.
All right, so let's get at this intersection.
You see where I start and end, blue start and end, red set one,
set two, and then my output goes at set three.
So all I need to do is look at this with less than.
If what's blue is pointing at is less than what red is pointing
at, I'm definitely gonna write it over there, because that's
how I keep things sorted in my output.
Well, they're not.
So, well, if red is less than blue, then I will definitely
write that. But this also fails.
So I know that they're equal,
so I'll just write one of them
and increment both of them.
Also incrementing my output iterator because now if I was
done,
let's just say that the whole thing is done,
look at what green is responding with.
If I return green and say hey, my union had one thing in it and
I'm pointing just past it with this green thing.
That's how the output iterator works.
Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah.
Like the letters and like how you looked at this and knew that
you had to use like
forward iterators and stuff. When we get to the codes on the
next slide.
Yeah, it's on the next slide. So let's go through the rest of
the algorithm and then we'll make some more sense of it.
So now you see what's gonna happen, right?
I'm just always gonna be comparing at,
you know, basically you can call it
start one or first one or last one or wherever you're at,
name convention. I'm gonna be comparing first one
and first two to say who's less than if I've got a positive on
one of those less than That's the one I'm gonna return.
I'm gonna I'm gonna push over to green.
So Beth is less than Blake. So let's push Beth
We increment green because we wrote there and we increment off
of Beth because we're never gonna have to write her again
And you see how I'm building up a nice sorted Union on the right
hand side. What about Brian and Blake BL
comes before BR So we'll write Blake in there and increment the
red and after we write to the green we increment the green and
so far my Union has three things in it my
Green iterator would be pointing at something that looks like
square brackets three Remember, I can't square brackets because
this is still iterators But it would look like square brackets
three because it's at the third thing which is just after
012 the three good ones all right Brian and Bob Bo before
Br,
we write Bob over there, increment green,
increment red,
and then lastly,
well not lastly,
it's last for the reds, right? Brian and Brian are equal,
so I just write one and increment both the red and blue,
moving past them in those sets, and write the green and
increment past it, so I'm ready to write again.
Now,
set two is empty,
there's no more things that need to go from set two,
so what do I do? I just write the rest of the things in order
from set one and I get Dan Emily Frank And I got this perfectly
good set 3 union over there That is sorted because it came from
sorted and you saw how that happened in linear time
every time I did a step I added something new to green and
Then the number of green things was on the order of the total
number of things. It's a linear function
Well if they weren't sorted let's just imagine they weren't
sorted so how would I know if Amy should go in there and
let's just do it like this all
right
so let's put Blake in there so when I got down to Blake how
would I know if I should put Blake in there or not I would
know that it wouldn't already be in set one that's good but I
would have to look at everything in set two and say have I
already inserted this from set two or if I just did well I
could say well let me just insert everything in set one
great now if
these things in set two are in no order I gotta say well
where's Amy look at all of these where's Blake look at all of
these where's Bob look at all of these where's Brian look at all
of these before I could put it into the green that makes sense
when they're not ordered I've got no idea where to look, so I
have to look everywhere.
When they are ordered, we see that I've got this,
I've got a stopping point. It's gonna be before this or
not.
It's not before this, then I'm good with it.
If it is, then we go.
Yeah.
So when do you compare the two sides between the two things,
right?
So that's a bigger single value.
I only need to compare things from the two sides when there's
two things,
right?
So the algorithm actually changes that at that point and
says,
once we're done here,
I'm done comparing,
I'm just gonna copy everything else that's left.
Similarly, if I'd have ended over here first,
and I say, okay, well, there's still stuff in set two,
but set one is empty, I'll just copy all of the remaining
things,
they'll have to be organized,
they'll have to be needed, and I'm good to go.
Set three, that's what I was saying, is set three had to be
set up by the caller.
Whoever called set union was responsible for making sure that
there was room for all of these things.
Well, they know that there's six in the one hand and four in the
other, and in the worst case, I could only have 10.
So you would set 10,
right? If you were doing setIntersection, similarly you
could say, well, if there are six in this set and 10 in that
set, the most I could have would be six.
So I only really need to get six in my touchdown area, right? So
it's up to the caller to set that up.
And then the called function will return this green arrow to
let you know what work it did.
So just to be clear, is that with resize or reserve?
So they need to be good,
right? This green thing needs to write at that location.
So, it can't be a reserved thing.
Reserved gets you enough memory for it, but remember,
the reserved thinks that it's empty.
So, it doesn't think that there's those things there.
You could reserve it and write into memory.
It would work.
I don't think that it would be,
you wouldn't be guaranteed anything.
So if you resize,
you would be guaranteed that that memory was initialized,
right?
And then you would be guaranteed that those were items.
I would feel like it might work if you did reserve and then you
would have to resize the container at the end,
right? So if I reserved 10,
it had capacity 10,
size zero.
I wrote like eight outlaws in there, right? They're in good
memory, they're good data, but no one knows they're there.
Then I can take that container and say, well, resize this
container to eight.
And since I already had capacity of 10,
it would be like, fine, okay, I'll point at eight.
And all your data would be good in there.
They would go from outlaws to good stuff.
But I don't think that that's a good way to do it because you're
not guaranteed that things won't happen that way.
So I would make sure that you resize it so that the data is
actually there and the data is actually initialized.
so then when I write to it even if it's an object I've got an
operator equals that says take this thing from the right and
set it equal to this
initialized thing on the left and then the operator equals
would take over and it would be fine so I would definitely use
resize there not
No,
it doesn't have to be a vector, it has to have a range that can
write to it, right? I could have a length list,
and if my green iterator starts at the beginning of the list,
we write at it, plus plus it, and it does an X,
and it does an X, so it could be it could be a vector, it could
be a deck, it could be a list,
anything that responds
with an output iterator.
My question was about the resize,
so can we use that for sure,
like vectors passing with that be that big, but then when we're
using the output iterator to write to it,
the vector doesn't know what we're writing to that data.
I think that size would be. Right,
but when you got done, its size would be still zero, even though
you had eight good things in it, And that's why I'm saying you
would have to resize and then it would say,
okay, well, now I think I have eight of them in there and
should be okay.
Should be, like I said, it should be, it's not guaranteed
to be though, so.
So,
whenever you resize on that memory or on that vector that
has a size of zero but capacity of some set of size,
it doesn't affect any of the. Depends on how much you ask for,
right? You know,
whenever,
say you don't have a vector to start and you just resize from
the beginning, doesn't it default initialize all that
stuff? Yeah,
yeah, yeah, you're right. I think it would initialize
them,
especially if they were objects.
Yeah, and it might even initialize them.
So yeah,
that's what I was saying. You're not guaranteed to resize
it's going to work for you.
So that's why I wouldn't try it.
And then the way that the memory also works, remember, So if I
had reserved 10 and then resized to 8 it wouldn't need to go get
new memory If I had reserved 10 and then resized to 20 It would
have to go get new memory and I would be all the way out at that
point, right? It wouldn't know to copy those original things
over there and I'd be sunk
All right, so there it is in pictures and arrows Here it is
in code
We've got these five parameters coming in.
This one even has
the sixth parameter here the sixth parameter is how I'm going
to actually compare the things and if you're given a problem on
the exam it's gonna be a problem with a comparator in there and
that's one more place for you to fall into a pit so the algorithm
that you're going to be doing is probably going to be based on
less than if you use the less than anywhere in code it's a
reason to give you the wrong answer right because in this
case if I want to know less I only know how to get it with
that comparator right and I certainly won't be comparing two
iterators as less so you can just think if there's a less
than on my page I definitely things up all right
so the compare is here so as I'm looking at the blue arrow we'll
call that first one and I'm looking at the red arrow we'll
call that first two the blue dashed arrow that's last one the
red dashed arrow that's last two and then result that's my green
arrow so all of these things are here from the previous page and
you can see that there's three while loops in this
they're not nested so we had a good chance at being linear
because what controls them the first while loop looks at last
and first in both one and two situations so well how do those
things change and you can look through and see in line 7 line 9
line 11 all I ever do with the first one and stuff is like a
plus plus probably gonna be linear what happens after that
this next loop what do I modify I'm modifying first one to
control the loop and I'm plus-plusing that.
Same thing,
first two controls this third loop and I only plus-plus that
inside there. So it's a really good reason for
you to believe that this whole thing is linear.
There's no nesting and the way that I get out of the loop is by
incrementing one at a time.
The first loop says as long as first one is not last one,
meaning there's good blue data,
and first two is not last two,
there's good red data,
do this loop and that just does that comparison thing that we
said you know say if and that's where the compare comes in line
six this is where if you write the less than you just lose four
points right if what first one is pointing at is
less than what first two is pointing at you have to
dereference there because an iterator is not data it's a word
of fine data the compare function works on data it takes
two pieces of data and says yes the first one is less than the
second one or no it's not so if what's that first one is less
than what's that first two that's the one we got to put in
the set so write that to result dereference result for writing
dereference first one for reading set them equal and then
increment the both of them move the blue arrow move the green
arrow and that's the end of the while loop where we go back to
the top they
are different iterator types so like up at the
top you see like in iterator 1 iterator 2 this is exactly the
way that the STL does these maybe non-congruent range types
right so in this particular situation I could have in
iterator 1 pointing at a vector and in iterator two could be
pointing at a deck and I would still be able to set intersect
or set union them if I said there was only one in iterator
type then I could only Union vector and vector deck and deck
list and list but as long as there's the two types this one
could be one which it could be a vector and it could be two which
could also be a vector but it could be a list or it could be a
deck and so that's why the the types are there
At compile time, it gets known when you're asking for it.
But in your code, when you're like,
deck.begin,
deck.end,
there's my set one,
and vector.begin, vector.end,
there's my set two,
it says it's OK with keeping those as two different types of
iterators.
Because one is a deck iterator,
and one is a vector iterator.
And they have to be separate types for them to compile.
No because this isn't a header file.
It never really happens until you actually include it and then
do it.
Yeah it's that template emission time when it turns your
templated code into real code it can say okay they're calling
this iterator from a deck and that's my first two parameters
and they're calling this iterator set from a vector and
those are my second two parameters and then it makes the
code special for that.
Yeah.
How do you, like,
output iterators you can only write to write.
Write and increment.
Yeah, so how does that iterator enforce that invariant?
Because whenever you do it, you remember it's not like object
but you're gonna get the elbow to show up in here.
How is that enforced?
I mean, if you are writing to the location,
right,
even if it's an iterator that you can read from,
it's not,
it's just not being used that way in this code, right? And so
the code in the STL is going to live within that contract.
Now, you might be able to say, well, I've got an iterator that
does allow me to read and write, and then I just happen to do the
wrong thing with it.
And it'll work fine until somebody compiles your code with
an iterator that doesn't allow that, and then it literally
won't even compile.
It'll crash,
and it won't even crash.
It just won't compile. So that's why some of the stuff
that happens in the P2B testing file, we see there's that thing
in there where you have to write something that has a,
it's like an integer that's just inside of a struct.
That's what the data type is.
And the reason why is,
if we just gave you stuff with testing integers,
you could write these things with less-thans in them for the
comparison,
and it would work, and you'd get all the right answers.
And then you would submit it to the autograder, and it would
literally not compile.
Because we'll say, well, what if we don't use an integer? What if
we use a struct?
And the struct doesn't know how to be compared,
so the compiler doesn't know how to compile that and say, well, I
can't do less than,
so there.
So this is a similar situation where you can use the iterators
improperly
until you can't.
So for first one, like first one, first two,
the last one, are they ordered or are they just being pushed?
In this one, it says input iterators.
We would have to look at some actual docs.
Let's get into other.
Let's get into algorithm.
Let's get into set union.
Garbage
All right, so Not surprisingly that stuff that we have on there
is exactly the STL documentation.
So this looks at it as an input iterator
So you might be in this case past the forward iterator in
here But you would still only that the function still only
works on it as if it's an input iterator, right?
So that's the that's the minimum sort of requirement, right? so I
could pass in two random iterators and they would work
because the function itself only tries to compare dereference and
increment it doesn't try to random access it even though it
might be able to but it doesn't know that every iterator that's
going to get can do that so it
doesn't
okay so
that's a back
inserter is,
is a slick way to do things. It works kind of well.
So you don't have to do the ahead of time, let me organize
how much space I have.
But a back inserter essentially lets you write to it and
increment it
by doing push back.
Let's say here's a vector.
I'm gonna get a back inserter on it and stick that in as my
result parameter.
Then every time that it writes to result and increments it it's
like a pushback if the vector needs to grow it does so back
inserters can be used similarly so if you need to look that up
look up back inserter it's a good plan alright so what's
going on here the rest of what we already saw right the second
branch that else if there that's when the set to item shows up
earlier than the set one item does
Else if compare dereference first two comma dereference
first one.
That means if it's true that the thing in set two is less than
the thing in set one,
so we write the thing in set two and increment both first two and
result.
Otherwise the third branch is when neither of them is less
than the other, they must be equal.
Write one,
increment all three of the iterators.
First one, first two, and result.
Yes, so the question was,
if the special type that you have has an overloaded operator
less than,
yes,
it will call compare with standard less,
and if your less is overloaded,
then it'll work just fine.
All right, so this is to the point where one of those sets,
possibly both,
is empty. When I get out of this first
while loop, I know one of them first one has reached first last
one or First two has reached last two could be both, right?
If it's both then I'm done done because both of my input sets
are empty or completely unioned I should say If not, like we saw
in that first version remember first one was not equal to last
one when we got out There was still stuff left in blue
So then what we do we just wrote all of the blue things there
until first one was equal to first to last one
That's done. We move on here and say well
this first two equal to last two
Yeah, they're equal so I don't have to do anything there either
return result
So what what does it say up in the contract right the contract
says we're going to return an output iterator Do you know how
to create an output iterator?
No well you work with the one you got then Right, I don't know
how to create a reasonable output iterator in this sense
because the only way I could get an output iterator that I
created was if I was to go
Get some memory right and then write to that and say here's
where you can write. So Imagining that I've got the
one output iterator that I know about.
I just have to return it. So result gets passed in
results gets returned
Almost always you can just return results in this problem
25 and get four points
Almost always.
But you do want it to be pointing at the right thing to
get more points.
But that's why I return result here because you see that every
time I write to result,
18, 16,
11, and nine,
and seven,
every time I write to result,
I also increment result. So it's pointing just past the
thing that it wrote.
And when I stop,
it's pointing just past the last thing I wrote, no matter how
many I do write.
So this is the style that you have to master.
Think really quickly,
how could I change this function
to set intersection?
What needs to be done on this?
Right, so here's the only place where I would actually do the
writing,
and if the comparison failed, or if the comparison succeeded,
I just wouldn't write,
right?
Same thing here, and I wouldn't even need to dereference it,
really.
So I could do something like that.
If the first thing is less than the second thing, it's
definitely not in the intersection,
move past it.
First thing is less than the second thing,
move past it.
If the second thing is less than the first thing, move past that.
It's only when they're equal that I want to take one of them
and then move past the both of them.
So, yeah, you can do set intersection here, and what
happens when I get to the end of one list?
Just done, right?
So,
that's what set intersection would look like, see?
And so, when I'm talking about this stuff on the STL,
let's go back here,
look in algorithm.
There's this set of non-modifying sequence
operations. I can't scrabble on this page
because it's a web page not a slide, but you see it right
there this
non-modifying sequence operations one of those could be
your problem right and what 26 is gonna look like is gonna be
like
Problem 26 I can't even do it right instead of adjacent fine.
It'll be like problem 25
Blah blah blah searches the range first to last for the
first occurrence of two consecutive elements that match
and returns an iterator to the first of these two elements, or
last if no such pair is found.
Right, and then all you have to do is literally write that code
right there, you see it?
That's exactly getting that done, right? You would be given
the template line, and you'd be given the return type.
It'll say problem 25, and then it'll give you the parameter
list.
And that's what you get. Maybe a curly brace to start
with, that's all.
You go ahead and write the rest of this stuff,
lines four through 13,
close it up with a curly,
and rock off with 20 points.
So is this problem going to be in linear time?
Yes,
it's always going to be in linear time.
It's always going to be constant space.
Well, it might not be in constant space depending on your
output, right?
But it'll tell you all about it, right? It'll tell you about the
return value you'll get document.
It's not from the c++.com site.
It's from another
STL documentation site so the style is a little different, but
the the heart is always the same
As what I was gonna show you so it's gonna be one of these
non modifying sequence operations or a modifying
sequence operation I
I think the set operations are all off the table
because we show them all.
But they're not that hard to get once you get the style.
The key is the style,
right? The key is the style because the function is not
hard.
We saw how easy set union was. We saw how easy set intersection
was from set union.
So you know those kind of things.
And now we say,
well,
what does replace if do? it replaces all the values in a
range, or generate n,
or unique copy,
or reverse copy, or rotate copy.
You just have to do what it says, and don't mess up the
iterators.
So in constant space, you wouldn't have,
you can have like a variable or two or 10, but if I'm giving you
50,000 items, you don't have 50,000 variables.
So it does have 50,000, but then you set,
right?
Does that not count as a function? Well,
that function setUnion did not create a new set.
Right,
no,
because the caller had to do it.
The caller had to set up that memory.
So in reality,
setUnion doesn't create anything.
So that's the notion that callers are the two? Yes,
if it's going to be that way with an output iterator,
that has to be taken care of by the caller.
Did you mention,
are we expecting to be able to like,
like, define any of these functions that are,
like... Yeah,
yeah, like I said, we'll tell you all about it.
And we'll also give you the template line and the function
header, you know,
without the name.
Yeah,
yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, yeah, so I mean, if it was, for instance,
let's say it was set union,
set union,
right? You'd have everything one through five.
That's what's gonna be on the exam for you.
Yep, and then all you have to write is,
you know, six through 15,
16.
Yeah, they're all, because those are all linear time sequence
operations.
Right,
yeah. It's one of these things from
algorithm itself, so that's where you start studying
tomorrow if you're
laid-back or Tonight you want to get on it
Go through these don't they go through it super hard
Understand the kinds of things that are being asked for dig
into
One of these and be like okay the behavior of this function
template is equivalent to this
understand the style
make
sense so I mean this one is different from the version that
we have but it works it's the way to get it done
it
doesn't
do in line eight and nine.
I see iterator comparisons for equality.
Well, that one's wrong.
This one is not the comparator version, so it's fine.
So in line 11, I've got value comparison with less than,
which I would have to replace with calls to the comparator if
I got the comparator version,
right?
But then also,
all I have is dereferencing iterators, setting equal and
incrementing and all of my iterator uses is good and that's
what I got all right way extra time on this but I want you 20
20 points on 25
20 points you should get them sorry
24 is just a multiple-choice question
25 and 26 and 26 is some free response question that I don't
know whether or not it's written already but it doesn't follow a
pattern either it's whatever somebody comes up with so 25 is
always the STL question 25 on the final exam if you're ready
to start studying for that is always a dynamic programming
problem so if you want to start reading up on dynamic
programming or practicing some geeks for geeks problems on DP
that's how you get 20 points on the final two so as the kids
say let's go all right so
So this one talks about coding this function two ways.
So here,
we had somebody talk to us about using a back inserter.
So you see this back inserter in line 15.
The back inserter works as an output iterator.
And you don't have to do the sizing ahead of time.
In the first version, we say we're going to put our outputs
in the string,
this vector of strings called out,
and we resize it to hold all of the values I could possibly put
in there.
v1.size plus v2.size.
So it's resized to hold all 10 of them.
I call setUnion.
You see that it's called it with less of string there, which I
wouldn't really have to do. It would use less of string
anyway.
But at the end,
we erase from the output iterator to the end.
Because the iterator,
the output iterator is pointing just at the end, so it's
basically pointing at the ninth thing,
if there was 10 in the thing. So if I erase 9 and 10,
then I only do have 8, which is what I wanted.
So these are the two ways to do this.
You can either resize it ahead of time and then do the erase,
return the iterator.
Auto it is a really good way to do that.
You don't have to know the type. You don't have to care.
It's like give me what you want to give me and the compiler sets
it up. That's good.
Auto it. And then you just erase from it
to the end.
You could also, if you knew where that was,
you could resize to that many.
But you would have to say, how far away is it from
begin? And I can't really compare output iterators,
so I don't know.
All right, so here's the two ways you can do this.
This is a back inserter.
The back inserter doesn't really need the resize.
So the stuff inside the comment block between four
Sorry,
the comment block from three and 11 is one way to do things,
and then from 13 to the end is the other way to do things.
So that, I could have said all that by doing this,
right?
That's this stuff is all one step, or this stuff,
there's only the two ways.
Yeah.
Yes,
always one pass,
yep.
Well,
the function setUnion is saying I'm using this as an output
iterator so I will not try to read from it.
Nothing prevents it, it just doesn't,
right? In the case that I think
the back inserter doesn't give you an input iterator anyway, I
think the back inserter gives you an output iterator.
I'd have to look at the docs on it.
I haven't looked at it recently.
But that was what I would think. Anybody need a ring?
Go away,
Jared.
All right.
Back inserter.
The back inserter is a special type of output iterator,
so what you would be getting there would be supposed to be
used as an output iterator. If you used it other than as an
output iterator,
it might work,
it might not. it might not even compile so
that's why you don't do the thing that's why I'm saying that
the the function itself just knows well you're giving me an
output iterator I could read from there but I'm not going to
try to because I'm expecting it to be an output iterator
sometimes I could be right but other times I wouldn't compile
right because the compiler at template emission time
says hey are you trying to do a thing with this iterator that
you shouldn't,
I'm not going to compile.
So that's how it would break up. But it would only be based on
what you were actually using it with.
So in the situation where you gave it an iterator that you
could do illegal things with,
and you did the illegal things,
it wouldn't have a problem. But when you tried to do
something illegal that it didn't appreciate,
then it would say I can't compile that because it's not
possible.
All right.
So here is implementing sets with ranges.
You can think of initialize as something that can get done in
constant time.
If I've got empty data,
create me this new empty set. If I've got a set with a whole
bunch of stuff,
I'd have to sort them. That's why the n log n there.
Clear,
going to get that done in constant time.
Just ignore all of them. or if they're objects,
I would have to call a destructor on each of the ones
that I was trying to get rid of. So that's why it's linear or
constant time.
Is a member,
since they're sorted, I can always just binary search for
it.
Copy,
can't get away from that, less than linear.
Same thing, we saw set union and set intersection as being linear
functions.
So this is how ranges work using the universe of all the elements
that can be in a set. All right, job interview
problems.
Oh, we're going to Mars,
too.
What's next?
So,
given a sorted array with n elements and some number z, do
the following in linear time.
Find the pairs x and y such that x minus y is equal to some z.
Find the pairs x and y such that the magnitude of the distance
between them is closest to z.
So these are some good things to think of.
These are good thought exercises.
These are the kind of problems that do show up making things
work on an exam.
So think through things like this.
What if the array wasn't sorted?
How does that change things?
Right, well if I can't sort it,
if it's not sorted,
then I know this is probably gonna take me n squared time, I
have to compare everything to everything.
But if I can get it done in linear time when they're sorted,
isn't it better to just sort things first and then do linear
work? Because then I'm at N log N versus N squared.
But only if I can sort them. So if somebody gives me stuff
that's not sorted and I can't sort it,
and I can make an index sort of it, then you've got to look at
your memory and time requirements for what you're
trying to get done when questions like these are being
asked.
Because you say, well, here's a constant copy of this data
that's not sorted. Well, great.
I'll make my own index sort of it if I've got N memory to do
it. it because it's still gonna be
faster than doing n squared work because the things aren't sorted
all right that's that's Union
find what I tell you
that's Mars so you probably don't know your Mars geography
too well but I I
think you can go buy some land on Mars.
I don't know how you can enforce your claim, but someone will
sell you, I think, an acre of Martian land for about 75 bucks
an acre.
So,
it's a good thing for a girlfriend or a boyfriend, say I
bought you something.
It's a place you can go when I'm done talking to you.
Ah,
pfft! Ah, no.
But you can buy land on Mars.
You may never see it. Probably not
What's going on here is I got a bunch of these Mars locations
some of them. I can't pronounce all of them I
can't really remember
But you can think of Mars right now as having no roads
So to get from one place on Mars to another it's going to be a
challenge So our goal here is to say how can I connect all of
these things fairly cheaply building roads in America? Not
that cheap imagine getting the stuff that you need up to Mars
to build it they're probably even more expensive.
So we don't wanna do a whole bunch of road building that we
don't need to. So I don't wanna build a road,
I don't wanna build roads such that there's a road from every
city,
direct road to every other city,
right?
That would be a waste of time. We don't even do that here,
right?
There's not a road that goes from here to Jackson only
right, it goes from here along the way, you can jump off and go
to Chelsea or you can go wherever you want right so the
road system does that sort of thing here so when we look at
this we say I've got this set of elements right I
can think of them as being a bunch of sets of size one that
are disjoint because they're disconnected a disjoint set two
disjoint sets have no members in common so if I think of each one
of these as a set all by itself then I say that,
you know, this ceranium set doesn't share any elements with
this aeonia set.
There's no road there.
But if they were connected by a road,
I would say there is now a set,
ceranium to eronium, and everybody else is not in that
set.
But those two are connected.
So these are not in a disjoint set, they're in the same set,
and everybody else is in their own sort of disjoint sets.
So we're working on disjoint sets that don't share any
elements and often we need to know about whether or not sets
are disjoint or connected.
This is a often I say this is a an algorithmic thing that we do
often when we're dealing with data.
Graph connectivity being one of them.
So in this situation I say well I can't pronounce all of these
things. Oh I already drew a road on
there let's take my road off.
Let's put some roads on there. So we got a few roads there as
we get started, because that's where people moved.
We said, Merdiani is connected to an Oasis,
and Valle is Marinara's.
This just makes me think of Marinara sauce when I'm hungry,
it's lunchtime.
But,
these blue roads,
and you can see that all of these blue connected things are
in a set that is disjoint from the red connected things.
There's no members in common.
And after we get tired of trying to pronounce all these things,
we do what any programmer would do.
Let's throw some numbers on there.
These are nice color-coded numbers so I can really see what
the sets are made up.
And then we really get down to just putting it on paper here.
So now I can see this set of red things,
one, nine, three, two, and 10.
The set of blue things, 23, 13, 25.
The green things,
14,
15,
27, six, 17, and 16.
And then lastly, everything that's just kind of out there on
its own, since white doesn't show up on white,
we have it as a black set
with just the one thing in it. Not connected eight,
not connected four, not connected five, and so on.
So here's my sets of locations on Mars.
With this as my backdrop, the only thing that really matters
is, are they connected or let me connect them?
I'm building roads,
right? I don't want to build a road from 23 to 25.
It's a waste of road. because I can drive from 23 to
13 and then drive to 25, and I can stay on the road.
Now, if I wanted to build a road from 23 to 10, you'd say that's
a good road. I could be able to do that.
And if I did that,
I would have now a union of the red set and the blue set,
because they would be all one set that's connected.
So the union is when I take two disjoint sets and turn them into
one set with all of the elements of both.
and find the other operation that I have, is like, here's an
item,
here's an item. Are they already in the same
set?
Think about that. I mean,
if you're not staring at it in a picture like this,
like close your eyes and say, is 23 connected to 27?
How do I do that?
What set is 23 in? Is 23 in the set?
What set is 27 in? Is 27 in the set? I have to look at all the
sets I have to see is 23 in there? and then I gotta look at
all the other sets that I have to say is 27 in there, and then
I say, oh, they're the same set?
I guess you're in the same set, right?
Suppose you could say,
I looked through all the sets to find 23, and then I could look
in 23's set to find 27. That could save me some time,
but still worst case,
what?
N squared.
Look through all the sets to find 23,
what if there was just one set?
I looked all through the items that I find 23 and I look
through that same set find all those items to find 27 I say
yep, they're in there, right?
So if I had to do that a bunch of times, that's that's n
squared work, right?
So
Union and find are now these two behaviors that I'm trying to
implement
How can I do this so that it's as efficient as possible
We're going to use amortized complexity in this like we
talked about amortized earlier.
Remember amortized complexity says I will figure out the
average amount of work that it takes for one action by just
starting from the beginning going all the way to the end and
then dividing by the total number of things.
So it might take me one one step on this particular union or find
and it might take me ten steps on another fine but I can't say
the average is five.
I won't know until I do all the finds,
add them all up and divide by how many finds that I actually
do. It's kind of like an averaging
thing, but it's not like an average in the sense that any
one average would represent any operation.
So,
amortized complexity is coming at you.
Here's the first one where I just keep everything in separate
containers, right? This is where I'm talking about this linear
work. It's bad right our one and eight
connected sure I got to look all the way through group one to
find one I look through group one to find eight great
Now if I connect one and six how do I merge those things?
Right I got to move all the data because they're in their own
sets
So that could take as bad as linear time am I in the most
extreme case I've got two sets both size n over two the union
involves moving n over two items into the other n over two size
container,
that's n over two work, which is big O of n.
So,
my union could take me linear time if I put them in separate
sets.
For that matter, find takes me linear time.
So, I gotta look through everything to find a thing.
I gotta look through everything again,
possibly, to find the other thing.
So, like right now it's saying that there's rows between one,
four, five, eight, and ten some way, and there's rows between
two, six, and seven somehow.
But now if I wanted to add a row between one and six, now this
would be one big set because they would all be connected.
Right, exactly. That's what the union would be
when I'm keeping them as separate sets.
Yeah, absolutely.
But that could still be worst-case linear, right?
I mean, if that thing has half the items in it, still going to
take me n over two work to look through it.
I mean, it could have n minus one of the items in there.
I still don't know,
or n minus 10 is still on the order of n, worst-case,
order of n to find the first one,
worst-case, that same order of n to find the second one.
So we can't get away from linear time there, which isn't terrible
in some situations, but I'd like to go faster.
Always wanna go faster if I can.
What's faster than linear time?
Logarithmic time,
which is gonna imply some amount of sorting,
or constant time,
which is gonna imply some sort of awesome.
So,
let's see if we can get there.
So,
this first one is, let me see that
I go another route. I say, what if every item now
has a representative.
You know,
movie star,
I got an agent.
I need to talk to me, I need to talk to my agent.
Got a representative.
So what's good about that is
I can say, well, how do I find out if
two people are already connected?
Well, I just go look at their agents
if you have a representative,
right? So kind of like a basketball team.
I go see if you've got the same coach as I've got,
we're on the same team and I didn't have to look at all the
players.
Just ask you who your coach is, ask me who my coach is, done.
That's pretty slick.
That's what?
It's constant time.
It's way faster.
Find operation now is quite fast.
It's gone to linear time here.
So here's my graphic where I'm gonna go ahead and give
everybody a representative.
And in this case,
we'll start out with everybody representing themselves.
So it's a lot less flashy than agents and coaches.
But if everybody's representing themselves, this still works
pretty easily, right? What happens when I wanna try to
union one and three? I can't union them unless I know that
they're not connected.
Well, who's one's representative?
One.
Who's three's representative?
Three. They're not the same.
I can union them. The graph even tells me so, but
now I can draw it in there.
So I do that. And I say,
then to make this easy, let's go from first to second.
So,
I'll now change three's representative to one.
Now, I know that they're connected, somebody wants to try
to connect, we're in good shape.
How about three and eight?
Three's representative is one,
one's representative is eight, the graph tells me I can make
this.
Three and eight looks like that, right,
logically.
And I'll do the same thing, I'll take the first and use it to
represent the second. So I'll say eight is no longer
representing itself, it's being represented by three's
representative, which is one.
Good.
One and five. One's represented as one, five's
represented as five.
We do that.
It draws like this.
We're good.
How about seven and four?
Seven's representative is seven, four's representative is four.
I can do that one as well.
I'll take the first one and use it to write to the second one.
So now four's being represented by seven.
Seven's being represented by seven.
and they're in a set together.
All right,
how about seven and two?
Seven's represented by seven, two's represented by two.
I can draw that line without any problem.
And so then I can also update two's representative to be
seven's representative, which is seven.
That one's good.
And now we're at the union of two and five.
Two's representative is seven.
Five's representative is one. So they are definitely not in a
set together, which means I can draw the line.
Great.
I also can do the update.
And what was I doing before? I was taking the first one's
representative and making the second one's representative be
that.
So two's representative is seven.
I should change five's representative to be seven.
Right?
Let's try it.
Okay.
Now you look at the graph, you see that everybody's connected.
But what happens if I try to connect
four and three? Let's do a find on
four and three. I say,
well, four's representative is seven.
Three's representative is one.
They're not connected.
That's not right, though, is it?
They are connected.
So the way that I did my union was actually wrong.
My union was too simple because I was going for speed.
But what I really need to do is every time I go and give
somebody a new representative,
like here when I said one's representing three and one, I go
here and I change three to one.
But what I really need to do is say anybody who's represented by
three now needs to be represented by one.
So I gotta do a linear search and say, hey,
two, are you represented by three? Three,
four, five, six, seven, any of you that are represented by
three, I need to change you to a one.
So in this first example, I didn't do more work than I
already showed,
but what I didn't show was the other things that I needed to
do.
So that makes it such that my union is
still linear.
Find is faster,
but unions,
still linear.
All right?
What if we could make it faster now and say, we don't just know
who our representative is, what if we know who someone who knows
who,
someone who knows who our representative is?
Sort of like a level of indirection.
So you might not know who your representative is, but if you
say, I think it's you,
he could say, yes, I am your representative.
Or he could say, well, I don't know, my representative is over
there, so if I'm your representative,
then actually our representative is over there.
And that person could say, well, really,
they represent me, and we could have this long chain of
representation. But it makes it super simple to
do the union.
I just change the representative, and then in the
case that we had before, I say,
well,
now I can go back by hopping through this chain of things,
right?
So,
in hierarchical representatives,
what do I do? I do one to six,
one, two, three, four, five, six, that's one,
seven,
eight,
I go one to eight,
that's good, so I change eighth representative to one,
I go one to three,
this gets one,
gives me that little crow's foot there, I'm doing so good so far.
Now five to six.
Five is going to represent six,
but currently six is being represented by one.
So all I have to do is say,
hey,
one,
you're represented by five.
And wouldn't you agree now, not from the drawing, but from the
list,
that five and six are connected?
Because six says,
well, who's your representative? Six says, I think it's one.
One says, no, I think it's five.
Five says, who's your representative?
It's me, it's five. Okay, they're the same
representative. They are connected.
So that's what this hierarchical representation does.
It allows me to speed up my unions
because I can now do a union in constant time.
Sounds great, doesn't it? What does it do to find though?
Slowed it down,
right? Because now fine could be like, I think it's five,
I think it's four,
I think it's three,
I think it's two, I think it's one.
Oh, we just looked through the whole thing.
So now fine has gone down to linear time and union has gone
up to this fast time. But what's the problem with that
is I can't do union without doing fine first.
So I am stuck here at linear until I find a way to get
better.
One.
Five is representing one.
Make one representative five?
Because I wouldn't know where that would be useful.
You would say I would do it that way because more people were
represented by one than were represented by five.
Is that why you're choosing to swap it around, or why are we?
Then it's just like,
you're right,
it's just like,
you're right,
it's just like.
No,
it doesn't end up saving you anything.
It doesn't save you anything, right? Because we're at this
situation here, where we're just at one only,
we're trying to union five and six.
So you're saying, I could union five and six by saying five's
representative is one,
right?
So that could work, but now I've changed the order of what I was
doing. Before, for the first three, I
was saying,
take the first and use it to represent the second.
Right?
And so I could change that at any time, but then I would have
to have a reason.
Like why do I sometimes represent the first with the
second and sometimes represent the second with the first?
Without knowing a solid reason as to why, I would be just as
likely to get a good result as I would be to get a bad result.
So we stay deterministic and make a plan and stick with it.
Sure,
but that's not much different from saying who's ever first,
right? As I was taking five before six because it was first,
not because it was lower.
Right, so yeah,
when you don't know, you just have to pick something and then
just do it that way.
You're gonna, yeah, you're gonna find before you try to union,
yes.
So the union itself, though, you don't have to do anything for
it. The union is counting on you to
have already done the find.
The union's only job is I will connect them.
It's your choice to tell me whether or not I should.
All right, so last one.
This is the tough part, this is path compression.
And in path compression, what we're gonna do is,
as we do that chain,
I think I'm represented by five.
Five thinks they're represented by four.
Four thinks they're represented by seven.
Seven thinks they're represented by two.
When I do that,
I get all the way down to the end of that chain and figure
out, well, everybody actually thinks they're represented by
two
so I'm gonna walk back through that path
and tell them, oh, you're really represented by two.
So five doesn't think it's four anymore.
Four doesn't think it's seven anymore.
7 thinks it's 2,
4 thinks it's 2, 5 thinks it's 2, and 2 knows it's 2.
So that find is now no longer read-only.
I don't just go ask it.
I'm going to ask it and make changes.
So we'll pick up there, that's the hardest part of this to
understand,
but the cool part is that it makes things look like constant
time both ways.
