All right,
so we were talking about Union Find.
Remember,
we're trying to figure out how I can join these things together.
And this is a common thing that occurs.
Our play fun was building roads on Mars.
Say, how do I connect everything without wasting time building
roads that I don't need? but the same thing is true for internet
connectivity across the United States.
I don't need to have my router connected to every router in the
country. I just need to find a path that
they are connected through.
And so that is a union find because if there's a section of
the network that isn't connected to the rest of the network,
that's completely inaccessible.
As long as there's one connection in there, I'm good.
So what I don't want is a disjoint set that includes
somebody.
So if I take these things and say, well, I've got this subnet
on the East Coast and this subnet on the West Coast,
one connection and the whole country's covered,
right? So I'm saying this because Union Find isn't just a
silly thing about building roads on Mars.
It's a common occurrence when I've got a set of things and I
need to make sure that there's a certain amount of connectivity
going on there. So,
we'll stick at finishing up Mars, but we said we can put
things together in sets, and that was a little inefficient,
because every time I wanted to do a union,
I'd have to look in every set.
And so that was taking me linear time.
And every time I wanted to do a find,
sorry,
every time I wanted to do a find, I'd look in every set, so
that was linear time. And then the cost to join two
sets could be as bad as linear,
too. So when I kept the groups in
separate sets,
then it was linear and linear to do union and find.
Then I said, well, what if I used a representative and
everyone knew who their representative was?
So then I could say, well, who's your coach? Cause that's my
coach too, I guess we're on the same team.
The representatives sped things up because now find was quicker.
Say, who's your representative? Who's your representative?
Oh, you're already connected,
constant time.
But when I said, now that you're connected, We have to tell
everyone that thought that they were on your team that they're
on this team So the Union was taking me linear time, even
though the find was constant time
That was when we knew who our representative was
Then we added this hierarchical representative where you could
say well I know who I think my representative is but if you go
check with them they might change that information.
So I could be representing this person, they could be
represented,
and so on. So we had this chain, and so
what that did is it made it much faster to do union.
Because now I didn't have to go say,
well,
if you were representing 10 people,
I don't have to go tell all of them that your representative
has changed.
I'll just tell them,
tell you that your representative has changed, and
then when they try to figure out who the representative is, they
come ask you and you say well it's not me anymore it's them
okay so what that did was that made Union
faster I just had to update the actual connection and through
the indirection we could get everyone but it also makes find
longer now because when I say who's your representative
you don't No,
you can find them, but it could be as bad as linear.
If 10 represents nine represents eight represents seven
represents six represents five represents four represents three
represents two,
they say, hey,
who's your representative?
Two,
I think it's three.
No, I think it's four, I think it's five.
So if we go hierarchical representative, we found out
that we could flip flop things.
Now,
union is way faster,
but find is back to linear.
So we're playing around, trying to get faster,
but then we also realize that I can't union without doing a
find,
so even though my union is constant time, I'm still going
to have to do that linear find first before I feel safe about
unioning because I don't want to make any unnecessary
connections,
right?
That was where we left off. That was all my warm-up.
Now we're at this step right here that's called path
compression,
and it has to do with how the hierarchical representation
works.
The hierarchical representation,
when I start asking someone who's their representative, and
they say,
well,
who's your representative to?
Two says, well, I think it's three.
Three says, I think it's four. Four says, I think it's five.
I think it's six, I think it's seven.
They can say,
they get all the way down and say, oh okay the actual
representative is 10 that was a really long find
but path compression says what if we treat
find as a modifying operation because
before we were just saying who's your representative and it was
read only just give me that information in path compression
though as I looked on that 2 to 3 to 4 to 5 to 6 to 7 to 8 to 9
to 10.
Okay, I know who it is.
Then I'm going to go back and say,
well, 9 thinks they're represented by 10, but now I'm
going to tell 8 you're actually represented by 10.
I'm going to tell 7 you're actually represented by 10.
6, 5, 4,
3, 2, every single one of them now knows that they're directly
represented by 10.
So that path compression says, if I have to do this long find
lookup,
I'm gonna update everyone in that chain
so that they aren't hierarchical,
they're direct.
What that does is it takes these really long chains and it's
actually the longer the chain, the better.
A really long chain, I'm gonna update all of those people to
know who their direct representative is So the next
time I've got to do a find,
there's a whole bunch more people that know exactly who the
representative is and they can find it in constant time as
opposed to linear time.
Does that make sense?
It's a little cloudy out there.
But even the small ones are okay.
So if I say,
well,
15, who's your representative?
I think it's 12.
12, who's your representative?
I think it's 10. 10, who's your representative?
It's me.
Oh, great, so 10's represented by 10.
I also changed 12 to be represented by 10 and 15 to be
represented by 10. So when I do this path
compression thing, I say for every element that I go through
this list of representatives, I find the ultimate representative
and I update all of them. So what does that do time wise?
It's not that much, right?
Because the thing about it, if I had to do that eight steps of
two to three to four to five to six to seven to eight to nine to
10,
if I had to do those steps already,
going back and say, well,
eight to 10, seven, you're ten, six, you're ten, five, you're
ten.
It's not any different complexity,
right? I did those eight steps to do the lookup.
I come back and do eight steps of update.
It's the same complexity,
just a constant,
an extra constant number of operations.
I set your ultimate representative.
I set your ultimate representative.
This is one more step, really.
So, the find operation,
It hasn't changed complexity,
but the next time I try to do it,
it's going to be faster.
That's what path compression is.
So it says here, it doubles the workload of find,
but it doesn't change its complexity.
It's the same big O to do the find.
But the next time I try to do finds,
they go faster.
So now,
the thing about this that makes it even more complicated is
we're now into some behavior.
Find.
That sometimes when I do it,
it works out like constant time, but other times when I do it,
it works out like linear time.
So how do I know what the actual complexity of that is?
Just like in pushback,
I have to do an amortized analysis.
So I had to do all of the unions and all of the fines and then
divide that by the total number of things to say what was the
complexity for each individual one.
That's what amortized complexity is because some of them are it's
the same operation and some of them are quick and some of them
are not.
So that's when amortized comes in I can't just pick any two and
average them or pick any three and average them or any five I
can't pick any number unless that number is n.
That's the only way that I can average to get an amortized
analysis here.
So,
what happens is,
starting with these n disjoint sets, so that's n sets of size
one,
I have to do all the operations to union and find up to one set
of size n.
Then I can divide that total number of operations by n,
and that's when I figure out how much it costs.
And so,
that's as thick as I'm going to get into the deep analysis.
But the answer that comes out is pretty surprising.
We see here that we get this n times the inverse Ackermann of
n.
And if you don't know the Ackermann function,
it's an interesting function.
But the Ackermann function grows very, very, very, very quickly.
So the inverse Ackermann function grows very, very, very
slowly.
Right, so if I look at the Ackermann function, so something
like Ackermann four comma four Not that inverse but the regular
Ackermann Ackermann of four comma four is just two to the
two to the two to the two
to the sixteen
Gigantic number that's a really big number right Ackermann four
there is greater than the number of particles in the known
universe.
That's a really large number.
So what that means is the inverse of that grows very very
very slowly.
That make sense?
So n times the inverse acriment of n,
it looks like this second thing,
it looks like this is based on N,
but in reality N's got to be bigger than the known particles
in the universe to get four.
So you can think of this inverse Ackerman as almost working out
like a constant.
If I got a hundred items,
that's an inverse of one see what I mean I got a thousand
items it's still one
so it's n times some
function of n but that function really grows like a constant
and so this is for doing all of the work for unioning and things
it cost me n inverse Ackermann of n so what does that mean each
individual one costs I just divide that number by n so I
take n times inverse Ackermann of n divide that by n
divide that by n cross it out right and I end up
with this is what the amortized cost of each
union and find is.
Great,
really I'm trying to understand this inverse Ackerman thing,
but what you really need to know is
the amortized cost looks like it's constant
because this is really close to constant.
And when I do this whole path compression based
Union-find,
all the operations look like they're
amortized cost. They look like amortized
constant.
So we went from linear-linear,
and then we went constant-linear,
then we went linear-constant,
and we've got this thing that looks pretty much like
constant-constant.
So I'll show you how it goes.
Question?
This is almost linear
for
all of them,
for all n,
right?
For all n, right? Because remember, this is amortized
analysis. So the amortized analysis means
I'm gonna do all of the things and this is what it cost me So
then I get a divide by how many things and and that's how the
cost per thing right
So if I start out here, let's do union two and four
Two represents four we make this connection
Check union one and two. So now if I say one is gonna
represent two
In graph you can see that one and four are connected but how
do I see it in the Union fine data structure I say well who's
four's representative four thinks it's two two thinks it's
one one agrees that it's one so now I can say yeah definitely
four's representative is one four's ultimate representative
is one and one's ultimate representative is one so if I
were to try to do a union one four here I would fail because
that's how it works we haven't got to the compression yet we'll
show you in a minute so how How about five and seven?
So five's representative is five,
seven's representative is seven. I can definitely make this
connection here. I'll update seven's
representative to be represented by five.
That's good there. How about five and six? Five's
representative is five, six's representative is six.
I put the five here. I can make that connection.
Now I'm looking at a union of eight and five.
So eight's representative is eight, five's representative is
five. I can do that.
And once again,
I've got this really cool indirect setup that tells me
I know who six's representative
is.
Six thinks it's five,
five says it's eight, eight says yes, it's me.
So this is what the hierarchical indirect thing has done and you
see how now my find could be linear because I could ask
multiple people who that is. I haven't done one of these
fines yet, but here when I come to this union of four and seven
Visually, you can see that they're on different teams red
team blue team
Now I've got to figure out how should I connect them? So I say
find
Who is your representative for?
Four says I think it's two
Two says I think it's one.
So I say okay Well, then I guess in that case,
four's representative really is one.
That's what the find does.
Now I know four's represented by one.
And then I want to say,
well,
how about seven? Who's seven's representative?
Seven says, I think it's five.
Five says, I think it's eight.
And eight says, it's definitely me.
So then really I can go back during find and update seven's
representative to eight.
Now,
when I look at this at union time, and I say, well, one and
eight are not the same,
let me update accordingly.
And I come back here and cross this off
and put a one in there. And now everyone's connected,
right? Because I've just made this union right here.
Everyone is connected except three,
right?
So pick any number but three.
And if you ask who that representative is and follow
that chain backwards,
you will find that it's one.
And then to show how we flattened the hierarchy,
look at how many of those values are actual ones.
One's got a one, two's got a one, four's got a one,
eight's got a one.
And then everybody else that's on the team,
their depth is only two,
right?
Somebody didn't get updated.
No,
I didn't go through six. I didn't go through six, that's
fine.
So five's represented by eight,
seven's represented by eight, and they go to one.
It's only six that's got this double hierarchy.
Six thinks five, five thinks eight,
eight thinks one.
But the next time I try to do a find on six,
I'll end up smashing that all the way down to one.
I'll smash five down to one, I'll smash six down to one if I
do a find on six.
Does that make sense? So this is a hierarchical representation
with path compression the path compression puts us at this
thing that looks like it's constant time for both But we
call it
Inverse Ackermann inverse Ackermann
If either of them is well in the in the fine situation I mean you
can't you're gonna have to use fine somehow, right? So at the
union time you say well who's your representative if you're
your own representative? if you just return from find in
constant time. You just say, it's me.
Yeah,
but you do the find.
And this is easily done in a, just like this looks.
When you have to do a union find,
you've got a vector that's got a bunch of numbers in it.
Each number is the name of the representative for that
location.
So you could do this with an iota and just fill this with 0,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
and then 0 is represented by 0, 1 is represented by 1, and so
on. When it comes time to do the
union to find, You just change the values in the vector.
The union find data structure is just a vector that you properly
behave with.
Make sense?
So this is union find.
That wraps that one here.
There's some study questions.
Turn those study questions into your own multiple choice
questions. That's a good way to do it.
So that should wrap that one up.
And that puts us on to our next set.
We're getting into sorting here whilst I download.
There's my face.
I'm desperately trying hard to get you all really good scores
on this midterm,
so that's That's why I've spent a bit more time in class talking
about stuff.
It's shaved some of my time.
What I would normally do if I wasn't as far behind,
I'd go to YouTube and show you these videos of this Hungarian
dance troupe that's doing sorts.
It's really funny.
They do these little dances and everybody's got a number on
them.
And so you can visualize these sorts as they happen.
So that's your walking homework is to go find the Hungarian
dance sorting videos.
They do a thing and they spin around and they compare
and they come forward and then they do a swap,
but I don't have time for that. So we're just gonna have to do
this sorting without the videos.
On this slide here, I see this really old photograph
and I think that the youngest kid on the far left just taller
than his sister, but he was the youngest and they were trying to
make it work,
right?
He's taller than her.
But it was a good family photo for back then.
We're talking about sorting though.
We're gonna talk about some basic sorting stuff.
And what does it mean to sort?
When I wanna sort, I'm trying to put some set of records,
often called records in CS, or we'll call them files as well.
We're trying to put them in some sequence by some keys.
And usually the key is less data than all of the records.
So you can imagine,
if I was to sort all of your student records, I wouldn't use
every bit of information in that sort.
I would pick something like a key,
something small, like either your UMID, which is a unique way
to do it, or if I wanted to do it for some sort of roster, I
might sort it by last name and then first name.
But both of those things are smaller than the entire record
So that's what the key is that I'm sorting and sometimes when
I'm doing just simple stuff. Sorry got some of my hair
Sometimes the key is the record like here sort these integers.
Yes, the key and the record are the same thing
Right.
So we've got these elementary sorts we're gonna look at today
bubble sort selection sort insertion sort and
Counting sort the first three are different than the last one.
The last one is a distribution sort It only works on integers,
and it doesn't actually compare
values to each other. So I could use a counting sort
to sort you all by class level.
Freshman,
sophomore,
junior, senior grad.
That's what counting sort would do.
So it's a specialized kind of sort when I know ahead of time
what the keys are and that there's some limited number of
keys. So if the keys were freshmen,
sophomore, junior, senior,
and grad,
then I can go through and count all the freshmen and know
where the freshmen are gonna sit and then count all the
sophomores in that same time and then freshmen sit here and the
sophomores sit after them.
So I could sort this thing in that way.
So that's a distribution sort,
sorted by your distribution, not by your value.
So that's why this one is different.
We're gonna go into those three right there and those three are
fairly similar. I had a real tough time when I
was at your stage
Differentiating them so do what it takes to figure out how
there's a different cuz we look at the code and it's almost
identical code and they behave slightly differently, but
They're they're so close to the same.
So we'll be talking about them. And then as I mentioned earlier,
we've already seen heap sort and
And that was not heap sort.
We've seen heap sort.
And then on Thursday, we're going to do quicksort and merge
sort together.
All right?
So let's go.
Why are we doing these elementary sorts?
They are good for getting some algorithmic maturity under our
belts,
as also we're going to try to speed them up a little bit.
We're not going to be able to change any of the complexity
classes, but we will look at some optimizations,
which is stuff that you can use in your own coding.
in the future.
And sometimes, we still use these elementary sorts because
they are good enough, if you use them properly.
Which containers can be sorted?
Obviously,
everything can be sorted.
We're going to be working on our connected, obviously, our
contiguous stuff for starters.
This is vectors,
decks, and things like that as opposed to linked lists.
So we'll begin with arrays in the slides, because we always
keep it C in the slides. but that's the same as being
able to work in a vector.
So that's how we do it.
STL sorting is done with iterators like much of the STL.
So you see this real quick example, you include algorithm,
that's where sort lives.
I've got this vector of integers A containing 4, 2, 5, 1, 3, and
I can call standard sort from begin to end of A, and it will
sort those things in increasing order.
because when you think sort,
you think increasing, and the STL does what you think.
So the default behavior of sort is to put things in increasing
order.
Good enough. So if I just say sort begin to
end,
and the thing that I'm sorting has a known sort order,
it will work.
So for instance, if I just give it a vector of zombies and say
sort,
I'm going to say, I don't know how to sort a zombie, I can't do
that. You're gonna have to add the
third parameter to sort to say when you've got two zombies
Here's how you figure out if this one is less important than
that one All right So we'll be using the C style here because
it's a little bit easier to see than the guts of a vector so you
see we'll say just like an int array a of four to five one
three and then we'll bubble sort from a
The vector itself or sorry that the array itself starting at
index zero up to but not including
Five, so it's a consistent half-open interval like that,
where we start at five,
we do dereference zero,
sorry,
we do start at zero,
dereference zero, but we do not dereference five.
Five is the index just past good data.
Exercise at home, of course,
rewrite using iterators. We know we need some iterator
practice, so take the algorithms that we have here in C, turn
them into vector or or or iterator based
algorithms and write them with iterator so you can practice
that the STL
will automatically support our object if the object has
overloaded operator less than defined for it so if operator
less than is defined for zombies,
then I can do that,
right?
We said don't use operator less than too often, though, because
it sort of locks you into one way to do things.
So that's what we talk about adding a third parameter right
here if you put in your own funcdoor, which is the same code
that you would write in an operator less.
You just use it as a separate function there, so.
All right.
We'll look at one of these things that I'm sure you heard
before that size doesn't matter.
Turns out that it does,
right?
So an internal sort is one where the size of the data is small
enough that I can see everything in memory.
That's good,
right?
An indirect sort, that's where I can see all the indexes.
We already did the index sort when we were talking about using
the functor
So sometimes an indirect sort I might have data items that are
so large I can't see all of them in memory But I can see all the
indexes in the version that we had we just might have been able
to see all the indexes And all the data, but there's a couple
of reasons. Why I might index sort one might
be size one might be a Number of reasons right we talked about
them already Then there's an external sort and this is when
I've got either too many elements to put them all in
memory or
the elements are too large and
so I Keep them on some external storage and I might only have
Sequential access to them or I might only have block access to
them mean like I can I can look at these 100 for now I can look
at those 100 later. We've got another hundred after
that How am I gonna sort all of them if I can only put a hundred
of a memory at time? And that's a consideration.
So these are the reasons why size matters in sorting.
It doesn't have to be non-contiguous.
It doesn't have to be a linked list.
But like I said, what if I had like 14 million records or 150
million records that I needed to sort? I'm trying to take over
the government and rearrange everybody's files here.
I don't want to put all of those files in memory just to sort
them, right? I might say, well, I've got one machine sorting the
A through Js. I got another machine sorting
the K through Ts, and then another machine, right?
So this is,
because the data is so large, it might not be able to all be held
in memory at once. And so I might split it up
between multiple devices
or any number of things.
So if you ever watch any old 70s movies with computers in them,
they go to the computer room. They got these things that look
like refrigerators and lights on them, and there's little wheels
that are spinning around. Those are tape drives.
That's how we used to store stuff on magnetic tape.
And so then when you wanted to sort stuff that was on magnetic
tape, you had to have a source tape for the one list,
a source tape for the other list, and then a destination
tape for the sorted result. And you would be able to read
from those two sorted lists and merge them together and put that
onto the third copy of it. So we'll see a real good
algorithm for that when we talk about merge sort.
All right.
What are our desirable qualities?
Obviously, the asymptotic complexity is the thing we care
about the most.
When n gets big, that's going to help us out the most.
So we're going to be looking at our number of comparisons and
our number of swaps, because that's going to drive the
complexity
of each one of these algorithms.
We'll look at a worst case, we'll look at an average case
and get a good feel for those things.
We'll also have some memory efficiency considerations.
Can I do this in place?
So an in-place sort means I don't need a separate container,
I don't need a separate copy of the data.
So if I've got a vector full of things, can I get this algorithm
to sort them without having to make a whole new vector?
That's not big O of one.
So if we're looking at being able to sort in place,
maybe I can sort in place with recursion that still uses the
same amount of data space. However,
if I'm using recursion, you know there is a chance for me to have
stack frames that might cost me some additional memory.
So we're trying to figure out where we're actually using
memory.
Sometimes I'm going to go with the indirect if I've got
pointers or indices.
So I might have n items and also n pointers and indices.
So I'm looking at how much of these things I need to do.
And then some sorts need a full copy extra of the data.
Like we talked about merge sort.
We'll talk about counting sort as well.
But those things need a full-on copy of the data to get it
sorted.
Another desirable quality is this stability thing.
And stability is this nifty little process that says, if
I've got two values that are the same,
right,
duplicate keys,
can I preserve their relative order?
Scramble data up here.
I cruise along, and there's a four.
And I cruise along some more,
and there's a four. So before the sort,
I've got,
let's call it left four,
and right four.
After the sort,
if left four is still to the left of right four,
I call that a stable sort.
If they've changed places,
it's still a correct sort, the fours would be together,
but if left four is now to the right of right four, Then my
sorting algorithm isn't stable
Why do we care about stability?
Well, sometimes we want to do a multiple level sort
Like this example here, I've got four actress
Charlie Sheen Halle Berry Lucy Liu and Martin Sheen.
I'm gonna try to sort them
Right?
I can sort them.
You see the list, they're already sorted by first name.
Charlie comes before Hallie comes before Lucy comes before
Martin.
That's good.
C-H-L-M.
Now,
when I sort them by last name, you see I've got two sheens up
there,
and they're the last ones. So it's going to be Barry, Lou,
Sheen, and Sheen.
And you see it that if I've got Charlie here
before Martin,
Charlie was before Martin up there.
So this is a stable sort because it's got Barry,
Lou,
Sheen,
Sheen, but Charlie comes before Martin.
This is another sort. This is a correct sort.
So the items are sorted by last name,
Barry, Lou,
Sheen,
Sheen,
but because the sort that used it was not stable,
you see that now Martin Sheen comes before Charlie Sheen.
And so when I want to do a multi-level sort,
that's when stability matters to me,
right? Because if I sort everybody in the class by last
name, And then I sort you by first name after that I
Don't want it to pull all the first names back together again,
and I have my last name sort
ruined
So that's what stability counts for so when we look at these
algorithms We'll be determining whether or not they're stable as
well as other things
Yes, yes, and so it's when that second sort happens that I
really care about the stability
Because the second sort's not stable, then it blows up my
first sort,
and I've lost what I wanted.
All right.
As we look at these algorithms, we've got a couple of different
ways that we'll look at them.
We'll look at them in their non-adaptive versions.
So a non-adaptive algorithm does the same amount of work
regardless of the data.
You can think of an adaptive algorithm as responding to the
data.
In the extreme case, if I give you some sorted information and
say, sort this,
an adaptive algorithm is going to do a little bit of work and
say,
done.
A non-adaptive algorithm is going to do all the work it
would take to sort it even if it wasn't already sorted.
So the non-adaptive algorithm can do more work,
well, typically will do more work.
The non-adaptive algorithm does the same amount of work
regardless of what the data looks like.
The data looks like it's already sorted, then the adaptive
algorithm does a little bit of work and realizes there's
nothing for me to do here and then quits.
So we'll look at these algorithms from a non-adaptive
viewpoint and then see if we can make them adaptive because that
can speed things up in some cases.
So we'll see here the adaptive sort performance, different
sequences of operations depending on the outcomes of the
comparisons.
And this changes our worst case and best case complexities.
So I mean our worst case isn't going to change,
but our best case can change,
right?
The sort in the best case is the data are already sorted.
I don't have to do anything.
Best case.
All right,
there's our sorting overview.
Let's get in to Bubble Sort.
So Bubble Sort has a couple of different ways that it can work
if you look at it in the literature.
The one way that Bubble Sort works is it slowly moves the
smaller things that way.
And the other way is it slowly moves the bigger things the
other direction.
In the end,
the result is the same. So it kind of depends on who's
implementing it and what they're looking at.
So this version,
it doesn't look like much, but it's just these five lines,
four lines really, if you don't count the header,
to get that done. We've got a four loop,
four loop,
and what do we think about the size on those four loops?
Well,
the outer four loop,
two, goes from left all the way up to right minus one.
So if the distance between left and right is n,
you can think of that as a solid n base loop, right? It's a big O
of N loop.
How about the inner loop?
The inner loop goes from right down to I,
and that's a little bit harder to cover,
but the way that you figure that out is say, well,
because I'm using some other variable referenced outside of
this loop, what's the worst it could be?
What's the worst I could be to make J do the most amount of
work,
right? J greater than I at the very worst I could be left so
really I'm looking at that inner loop in the worst case as going
from right minus one down to left this is another big O and
loop so I've got an end loop inside an end loop and then what
goes on inside the loop constant amount of work
There's an if in four, that's a constant.
There's a swap in five,
also constant.
So there's a constant amount of work inside the body of this
loop, and it's two nested for loops that are both N long.
So I'm happy with calling this a big O N squared algorithm.
All right,
complexity analysis,
done.
Now how does it work? It says in its first bullet, it finds the
minimum item on the first pass, and it does this by comparing
adjacent items and swapping them if they're out of order.
So I'll look at the last two items, and if they're in the
right order, I leave them, and I move toward the beginning.
And I look at those two items, and if they're right, I leave
them. But anytime I look at two items
if they're in the wrong order
If line four if what's at J is less than what's at J minus one
J is to the right?
L is to the left if what sorry J minus one is to the left So if J
minus one is greater than J
They should be swapped
And that's it.
That's what Bubble Sort does.
It goes through checks, pairs,
swaps,
checks, pairs, swaps.
By the time it gets all the way to the left-hand side on the
first round,
I can guarantee that the smallest item is in the leftmost
position.
What do I do then? I go back and do it over again.
This time I only swap down to position 2.
Now I can guarantee the two smallest items are where they
belong you just keep doing that until we're done We see that
outer loop goes all the way to write minus one.
You know how I hate a for loop. That's junky That's kind of a
junky for loop right there, right? Why do we do minus one
there? Why don't we just go all the way up to right? Isn't that
cool?
Well, it turns out that's just wasted effort
So imagine this, I've got 10 numbers,
they're all scrambled,
if I take and put nine of them
exactly where they belong,
where is the tenth one?
Exactly, that's the only place it can be is where it belongs.
So my outer loop only has to go n minus one times.
That's why it's the minus one in there,
all right?
So here's the data we started with, four, two, five, one,
three.
And in bubble sort, we look at one and three, and say they're
fine,
leave them alone. Move on,
five and one,
they need a swap.
So we'll swap five and one,
one,
five.
And then I look at two and one,
they need a swap.
And I look at one and four,
they need a swap.
Does that make sense?
That's my first pass.
It looks like that.
So after one pass, I've bubbled,
and you see what happens. The smallest thing is in the
leftmost position,
and my bigger items are slowly floating up to the top.
Maybe that's where the bubble name came from.
Think of those big bubbles as working their ways up there,
right?
What do I do on the next pass?
Three and five,
need a swap.
Three and two,
don't need a swap.
Two and four,
need a swap.
That's the pass.
Yeah.
If there was a for loop inside an if, yes.
So we see after the second pass, what do I know?
I know that after the first pass, this was exactly where it
belongs.
After the second pass,
these things are exactly where they belong.
So now I do a third pass. What do I do? Do I swap three
and five?
No. They're good.
Do I swap three and four?
They're bad, so I'm going to swap them,
right?
That gets me this. So now I know that one is
perfect,
two is perfect,
and three is perfect. That's all I know.
You can see that the rest is perfect.
The algorithm can't though.
Algorithm doesn't have these human skills.
Algorithm has to do another pass and say, okay, well, on the
fourth pass, I'll guarantee that these two things are where they
belong because once I put the fourth thing in place, the fifth
thing has to be in place. So the last pass goes through
and doesn't make any changes, but it did do a comparison on
this four five and decided not to swap there so after four
passes I can tell that all five of these things are where they
belong and so if you look at what goes on in the code there
right every time we're saying let's start and work our way
from the outer loop starts at I meaning I'm gonna put the
leftmost thing into position this iteration then I go to the
inner loop and say let's go to the end and swap Swap swap our
way up to I then I move I over swap swap swap swap swap.
I move I over and so on That's bubble sort
Yeah
Yes, right so I would be something like
Yes,
it's exactly one past the end. So the right,
in this case, is one past the end, just like our standard sort
of half-open interval. It would be like zero,
one, two, three, four,
five.
Don't take the five, right?
All right,
so currently it's not adaptive. We do the same amount of work.
We do those same for loops even if the data were already sorted.
I just wouldn't do any swaps
So you see I would do that same number of comparisons
How could I fine-tune it so that I could do less work
What would make sense when would I want to stop yeah
Exactly right if I make a whole pass and I haven't swapped
anything What am I gonna do in the past after that a whole lot
of nothing more, right? And the past after that a whole lot of
nothing more and a whole lot of nothing more So if I can ever
make a full inner pass
Without doing any swapping I can say I'm done here the next time
doesn't need to go through so
You see here. We've added this boolean inside
in between the loops now say that the swapped is is false
then I'll go through the inner loop and now if it's time to do
that swap you see in line six I say let's set swap equal to true
so now after I get done with the inner loop I say if I
haven't swapped anything break out we're done so this is an
adaptive version of bubble sort if I give this one, two, three,
four, five.
It'll set up, say,
bool swapped is equal to false.
It'll look at five, four, four, three,
three, two,
two, one. And it'll say, I'm done.
So this is an adaptive version of bubble sort.
Bubble sort is not in the standard library.
It's such a low performance sort that it's just not there.
So we're learning how some sorts work.
We're learning how to write adaptive code, so we'll learn
and be able to compare some, but this is not something you're
going to find in the SEL.
And, well, here you saw when,
in this one I guess I didn't. I had to do that last pass
anyway,
but if I were to sort one, two, three, four, five,
then I would say one,
two, three, four, five. After one pass,
I'm sure the one is where it belongs.
After the second pass, I know that two is where it belongs.
After the third pass,
I know that three is where it belongs.
I have to do all of those passes to get this done if it was
already sorted.
You see what I mean?
All right.
So,
in our non-adaptive version,
it's approximately n squared over two comparisons and swaps
in the worst case and in the average case.
So n squared over 2 is big O n squared.
And I can say,
even in the best case,
I'm going to do n squared over 2 comparisons
if I'm not adaptive.
In the adaptive version, I'm still going to do the same work
in worse than average cases,
n squared over 2 work.
But I come down to just n comparisons and as few as zero
swaps in the best case.
Right? So this is better.
When the data are sorted,
it's a linear algorithm rather than an n-squared algorithm.
That's bubble sort.
So its advantages are it's pretty simple to understand.
You saw it was written in four lines.
It's easy to write. even if I go for the adaptive
version what I added like three or four more lines not too bad
it's stable we talked about that stability thing and it does
some pre sorting as we go remember as I put the one all
the way over here the four and the five are moving up this way
so every time I do more real work I start to do more partial
work as well so it's getting better and and better as we go.
And it also says the advantage of the adaptive version finishes
quickly if the array is already sorted or almost sorted.
Is it a bubble sort?
You just have a best case scenario of n.
The best case scenario is n comparisons,
not swaps, right?
The best case scenario is I don't have to do any swaps.
And I look at 5, 4, 4, 3, 3, 2, 2, 1, and there's my big order
of N comparisons,
but I do zero swaps.
So the zero swaps is not the best case?
Well, it's not the ideal case, but it can be on the complexity
of the best case, right? If I do two passes,
right,
that's going to be a whole lot better than...
Because what drives it is what's the total number of comparisons?
And if I got 1,000 items and I got to go through one pass to
fix one thing in there and the second pass that says I do no
work,
to do no work, and then the third pass I skip.
That's still big O of N, right? I've gone through these 2,000
comparisons.
Yeah,
it's not about the swaps, it's about the comparisons in best
case, yeah.
So the disadvantages are, of course, worst case,
it's big O N squared, and it's never going to be anything
better than that.
And it's slower than our high-performance sorts, which
we'll get into as we move on.
All right,
bubble sort in the bag. Okay,
selection sort.
This is one that you kind of learn as a kid when you're
playing a card game and somebody deals you a whole bunch of cards
and say, well, sort your cards in your hand,
how do you sort them?
You go find the ace, you move it to the beginning,
you find the two and you put it after that, you find the three
and you put it after the two.
So selection sort does that. It says,
I can think of this as having
an unsorted thing that I'm gonna turn into sorted section
and I'm gonna grow the sorted section by
taking the smallest thing from the unsorted section and moving
it to the end of the sorted section I'm
gonna select the smallest thing no bubbling here we're just
gonna select the smallest thing put it up where it belongs so
you see this This this version of it.
It's pretty much all of the same lines that were in bubble sort
That's why I said it's confusing to keep these Separated there's
two for loops. There's that if I need to do a
swap then do the swap thing
But look at where the swap actually takes place in this
algorithm, it's outside of
the inner loop I
I go through this inner loop and say hey let me find the smallest
things index
and then in line seven after that I swap one thing
so remember in bubble sort we were constantly futzing with
stuff futz with stuff in selection sort I go that's good
all right I'm gonna swap you back to the beginning and be
done.
One swap per pass.
Before we could do as many as N swaps per pass, that's why it
was N squared.
Now I can only ever do N swaps.
N minus one if you want to get persnickety.
You see it in line seven?
What do I do in line three? I say I'm gonna remember where the
smallest thing I've ever seen is I'm gonna think it's the
beginning and then in line five and six I say if what I just
looked at a of J if that's less than the smallest thing I've
seen let's remember that remember that the min index is
now J
make sense let's see it in action same data for two five
one three I
will go through here and say I think four is the smallest thing
nope I I think two is smaller.
Yep, two's definitely smaller.
Oh, no, I think one's smaller.
Yeah, I think one's the smallest thing I know.
Now swap,
one and four.
I do one swap.
Just like before in bubble sort, though, I know after one pass,
exactly that is sorted.
Now I repeat,
right? I'm trying to fix this second spot.
You can see that it's fixed, the algorithm can't.
It says find me the smallest thing remaining in this unsorted
area. I think it's two.
Yep. It's two.
Yep. It's two.
Yep It's definitely two so Swap two with two and we'll be good
That's what it says right because in this case men index
and I are the same So I swap two with two
But the algorithm now knows that those two things are where they
belong
and these sorts yes yeah you can bubble sort the opposite
direction if you want
well either one bubble sort you can you can bubble sort from the
left to the right or you can bubble sort from the right to
the left what do you
mean well they weren't sorted
right when I started here after one pass I got that and then I
did another pass and that other pass said well the best I can
find is two and so it just said right there in line seven swap
two with two which did no work but I still had to do all of the
comparison stuff to find it and I wasn't smart enough to not
swap two with two so maybe that's a room for adaptation
later so after two passes I know that what do I do on the third
pass I think it's five I got an improvement at four I got an
improvement at three,
three's the best I've seen.
Let's swap three and five.
So after that pass,
I know that these three things are sorted, and once again,
you can see the rest of the data are sorted,
the algorithm can't.
So it's gonna run one more,
find me the smallest so I can select the smallest item.
I think it's four,
it's definitely not five, so it's still four.
Swap four with four,
and now we know that this whole thing is sorted.
we're not pushing the greater items to the right.
We're swapping them, but it's the case that, well,
what happens if the smallest item is last
and the second smallest item is first?
That selection's gonna be like, hey, let's take this second
smallest item, which was one spot away from where it belongs,
I'm gonna put it in spots away from where it belongs.
So it's not doing partial shorting, And for that same
reason it's also not stable,
right? Because if there was a two here and then
Another two right there and I decided to swap the one at the
end with the first two now the first two is after the
second two and
I'd have no way to fix that reliably so selection sort not
stable
Can we make it adaptive
What work do we do in here that we don't have to do?
Can we tell ahead of time when the whole thing is sorted?
There's no real way to tell that the whole thing is sorted like
we could in bubble sort.
When we did a pass and we didn't do anything, that gave us more
information. But in this case, we're always
doing one thing.
Unless I need to swap two with two or swap four with four,
I could say, I wouldn't have to do that.
So that's the only way that I can make this a bit more
adaptive to say is like, when I've discovered what it is,
and it's time to do swap A at I with A min index,
if I and min index are the same,
then don't do the swap.
What's the thing is,
if you have a new condition where you have your comparator,
and it just,
when it does the compare,
it also checks that comparator,
and then you can say,
like,
there's sort of things descending over here, if that's
a descending relationship and you compare it and return false.
So it can't be the whole array,
and if it was true for the whole array,
then that would be the target for this.
No, because you're not gonna be comparing the things in the past
to each other.
That would work if you were comparing them to each other,
right? If you're trying to find the smallest thing,
though,
just because the smallest thing was already where it belonged,
maybe like the one was already in place,
and I say, well, let me look at all the rest of them, I don't
find anything that's less than one,
they could be all kind of junky order in here, but I wouldn't
have to move this, and so you have to be able to compare
everybody to everybody before you know whether you're not
doing it.
Yeah,
like I said, you're not doing those comparisons, right?
You're saying,
I think the min index is at i, and then all of your comparisons
are what is at J versus min index not what's at J versus J
plus 1 and J plus 2 and J plus 3 so that I'm not inducted in that
way
J
minus 1 is never greater than J what good
would that do you if you're trying to find the smallest item
so Oh,
so you're like bubbling along the way?
Well, if you're just checking,
like, if it's adaptive,
so it's already sorted,
but the problem is sorted.
Yeah, I don't know if that gets you anything.
That one would be fun, right?
Like sort of like a hybrid bubble slash selection sort.
It's like a, it's like the same on its own.
Yeah.
Like sorting with one.
Yeah.
Try it, try it.
Right?
So here is the adaptive version. and you see that all we added
was this one one-liner in line seven and what did it do for
us
it actually added another comparison inside the
outer loop so it added n comparisons
in the hopes of maybe not having to do some of my swaps
so this is adaptive but not very It's very slightly
adaptive.
It only helps me a little bit when I'm trying to swap
something to where it already is.
And other than that,
it doesn't help me at all. It actually adds more work.
So it's extra comparison checks,
but it could eliminate unnecessary swaps,
which you would be willing to pay for if you had very large
data items.
So imagine you have a very large data item
and a swap of this thing with itself could cost me moving a
couple hundred K
three times just to keep this thing where it was it'd be way
faster to be like hey is are they the same just leave it
alone so there's a reason why we make all of our modifications
and then there's times when it can be helpful and times when it
won't be helpful so here I could say it looks like it's just
adding more work and it is adding more work which I'd be
willing to pay if I had really costly swaps my swaps were
really costly I wouldn't I wouldn't want to do that if I
was just sorting integers it's not even worth it right because
swapping two with two is really not that expensive
it's not as expensive as asking every single one of those hey
are we are you where you belong are you where you belong it I
mean it's just yeah It just makes,
yeah.
Standard swap,
question is how does standard swap work? Standard swap is
going to call swap on the object if the object has its own swap,
right? Which is going to be faster if it has one.
So for instance, if I say swap these two vectors,
what you would have to do is say, well, let me make a copy of
this vector,
and then I'll move this vector to that location and move this
vector down there. So you'd be touching all of
those items.
Whereas vector swap can say, well, what if I just take my
three pointers and swap them with your three pointers and we
can do this in constant time instead of linear time.
So standard swap will go as slow as you would if it has to, but
if it can go faster it will.
So that's why we use standard swap.
Yes,
yeah, it does the one temp variable, just a three person
swap, like from A up to temp,
B to A,
temp to B.
That's what it's going to do if it's just single values.
But if the object itself knows how to do a faster swap than it
will.
Well,
move is gonna delete some information,
right?
Yeah,
we'll mess with it. All right, I'm trying to get
these done.
So let's analyze it here.
What do we've got? The non-adaptive version is n
squared over two comparisons and n minus one swaps.
So in the best,
worst,
and average case, we're talking about n swaps.
Always got this n squared comparisons.
It's reliably slow,
selection sort is.
Runtime is insensitive to input.
In the adaptive version, And we did even more comparisons,
but in the best case,
we did zero swaps.
So that's what the improvement was there.
The runtime was slightly sensitive to input.
Selection sort's advantages are there's minimal copying of
items. If you've got big items,
selection sort is your friend.
And it's fairly efficient for small, and it's not too bad.
The disadvantages are it's always n squared.
And the runtime is only slightly dependent on the pre-ordering.
It doesn't really help what you've got ahead of time.
The smallest key on one pass tells you nothing about any of
the other passes. We don't get any partial sorting
like bubble sort did. It runs about the same on
already sorted,
randomly arranged,
reverse ordered. It doesn't really matter what it
is. Selection sort is the same slow
sort.
And it's not stable.
So there's selection sort.
All right. So we've been looking at sorting
algorithms to uh satisfy the direct request of something we
want to do it quickly we looked at bubble sort and selection
sort those are both n squared
yes probably but what would it do it would it would make an
already slow sort even slower right so to try to make
selection sort stable i'm not even say it's going to be that
easy
you're gonna add a whole lot of additional work and say, why
don't you just use a different sort?
Now we're gonna look at insertion sort
because we tuned bubble sort and selection sort a little,
not much.
We're gonna look at insertion sort which is also
asymptotically slow.
It's an N squared algorithm
but we can tune it a little bit more.
So look at that sort.
What does that look like?
It looks even more like bubble sort, right?
Bubble sort was for loop, for loop, if swap.
So the only difference between insertion sort and bubble sort
is where are those for loops working?
So we look at our outer loop,
now starts at the second item,
goes all the way to the end. So,
Bubble Sort started at the first item and went to one before the
end.
So, a little difference there.
And then,
the inner loop starts at
i and works its way down, whereas in Bubble Sort,
the inner loop started at the end and worked its way down.
So, we'll see how we get that to work there.
Then if the things are out of order, we swap them.
But what insertion sort does is it thinks of these things as
now,
before all the other sorts said, well, this is one big list of
unsorted things.
Insertion sort says this is actually two lists,
right?
This first list just has four in it.
And I can say without doubt
that a list with one item in it is already sorted.
So I've got a sorted list and an unsorted list, and I'm going to
take something from the unsorted list and insert it
where it belongs in the sorted list.
So I'm going to say,
well, let's go with two.
If four is my sorted list,
two really can only go in one of two places,
where it is or before the four
so I'm just gonna swap it till it lands where it should
so I say let's swap two and four and after that first
pass it looks like that and the algorithm knows these two things
are sorted I've got this two item sorted list and I'm trying
to figure out where to insert the five physically the five
could stay where it is it could go between the two and the four
or it could be before the two we swap it until it stays where it
is so we say let me swap five four if needed swap for two if
needed and then after that second pass I know that the
first three items are sorted
Insertion sort now works here kind of just like bubble sort.
Let's swap this,
bubble this thing down until it's where it belongs.
So one five swap,
one four swap,
one two swap.
And after the third pass,
I know that this,
this,
this, and this
are all sorted.
They might not be where they ultimately belong, but they're
the sorted list, And all that's left in the unsorted list is
three.
So let's bubble it on down.
Swap three with five, sure.
Swap three with four,
oh yeah.
Swap three with two,
nah.
Swap two with one,
nah.
So my pass goes through,
and it looks like that. So after the fourth pass again,
I'm good.
So each inner loop iteration,
is that if statement like a sequence of trues and then a
sequence of falses?
Each inner loop,
what do you mean?
So like,
say for example,
like from going from past three to four,
you check three with five and then it's a true, and then three
with four and then it's a true, but then after that everything's
passed,
it's three, it's then in the right place.
Yes,
but the loop as written does check those all the way out,
because if that was zero,
for instance,
if this was zero and not three, when it comes time to swap those
things in, I'd have to swap five and zero, then I'd have to swap
zero and four, then I'd have to swap zero and two,
I'd have to swap one and zero.
So that's why that inner loop of swaps goes all the way to the
end.
Even though you're right, sometimes we don't have to.
I could make,
you know, when it was three, I just made these three swaps, and
I don't have to swap two in one.
That's a room for adaptation,
right?
Because once I've inserted this thing where it belongs,
everything before it is already where it belongs.
I can stop.
So it's kind of like, you put the element in the last place it
was sorted,
and you kind of like, all the way over there.
Mm-hmm,
exactly,
yep.
Yeah, we're not going all the way there, right? And we're sort
of expanding this sorted list with something from the unsorted
list. And if you think about the way
that this goes, on average,
I'm only going to have to move this thing about half the way,
right?
Whereas on my bubble sort pass,
I'm going to touch them small, really.
So as we look at this,
the non-adaptive version we just looked at,
there's n squared over 2 comparisons in the worst case,
n squared over 2 swaps in the worst case.
It's just the same as all the other bad things.
But on the average case, I'm going to do fewer swaps.
Because I've already got a sorted section,
and the newest item that I can put in there,
I'm going to only have to go halfway through that to find
where it belongs.
So that's why it's n squared over 4 swaps in the average
case. The runtime is only slightly
sensitive the input the comparisons are always the same,
but sometimes the swaps change
All right, so let's improve it This is a general-purpose
elementary sort Like all the others it involves comparisons
and swaps the best way to Get faster is to use a better
algorithm But when we can't we can tune the one we have All
right,
and when you're talking about tuning things, where do you want
to tune?
Inside the innermost innermost loop because that's what's gonna
go the most You start as deep inside the function as you can
and try to make that stuff Faster because that's how you're
gonna get the most speed out of it
So here's our insertion sort
We started here
And we're going to modify that and look at it like this.
So in this case,
what we're going to do is a move instead of a swap.
So in move,
we're going to write less.
We think about a swap, I say A up to temp,
B into A,
temp into B.
So to do a swap, I'm always writing three times.
If I gotta do this thing and I swap it here,
that's three rights. And I swap it here,
that's three rights. And I swap it here, three
rights. So as I swap something into
position,
it's three times the number of positions rights.
Make sense?
Now,
if I were to say something like
one,
two,
well it should have been two,
but it works for me now.
So now look at that. If I'm trying to swap that two
to where it belongs,
if I swap two and six that's three rights.
If I swap two and five that's three rights.
If I swap two and four that's three rights.
If I swap two and three that's three rights.
That's 12 rights.
I can go faster with a move if I say well let me write three
Right two up into this position right here, and then I can write
six right five right four right three and
right two
You see how that one worked
Instead of swapping I did a move
So I've moved two out of the way so that I can push six back.
I don't write six into a temp.
I write six from where it was to where it's going to ultimately
be with one write.
Then I put five where it's going to be.
I put four where it's going to be.
I put three where it's going to be.
And now I've got room to put two exactly where it's going to be
in a write.
So whereas before with swapping I said this was going to take me
12 writes,
Three times n, the number of positions I'm moving it.
Now how many writes did this take me?
This took me n plus two.
So in this case it's six, which only sounds like half of 12,
but let's move something 1,000 spaces
and see do I want to do 3,000 writes or 1,002 writes.
It's a factor of three faster to use move versus swap.
So that's what's going on here, and the loop has been modified a
little bit to get that done. We pulled the J outside of the
for statement so that it would exist after the for loop went
away because we don't want that J to go out of scope.
So J gets defined up there outside of the for loop and we
scratch it off in the for loop and then the if swap gets
changed into hey, if what I'm trying to put into position
should go here,
move that thing over.
So we've changed the swap to a move,
and the condition that makes that happen is changed slightly
a little bit. So,
this is the new version.
At the end,
I put in JV,
the final thing there.
So this is move versus swap. It's now a third faster on the
rights.
Two-thirds faster.
It's one-third the speed in the rights.
Here's the second improvement.
This one is not a whole bunch different.
It's actually exactly the same as the first improvement.
But this version of is because all we did is get rid of the for
loop and turn it into a while loop so from a compilation
standpoint it's identical soon the exact same thing but look
what we did we said we're gonna keep for looping until we run
out of space while J is greater than left or we're not out of
order so now I say well let's keep while looping as long as we
haven't run out of space And the thing that we're looking at
needs to be moved out of the way.
That's my while loop
So no real change, but now we've taken the break out remember the
break was used to get us out of the loop when
Right the break got us out of the loop when this failed
V is less than a at J minus 1 now if V is less than a at J
minus 1 I get out of the loop here just the same
with no break it was the condition to keep me in the loop
on the previous slide and it's now the condition to keep me on
the loop on this slide so no change but now I can see what
I'm doing why am I looping I'm looping because I want to stay
in bounds and I want to move values that's what it says while
J is greater than left J is the index I'm looking at I don't
want to go J minus one if I'm at the left because I'll be out of
bounds so J has to be greater than left in order for me to
look at J minus one and that's what I want to do say let's
check a at J minus one so far so good
