Oh

I'm going to do it again.

I'm going to do it again.

I'm going to do it again. I'm going to do it again.

I'm going to do it again.

I'm going to do it again. I'm going to do it again.

I'm going to do it. I'm going to do it again.

I'm going to do it again. I'm going to do it again.

I'm going to do it again. I'm going to do it again.

Okay, we're going to come down to the other side.

Okay, we're going to come down to the other side.

Okay,

we're going to come down to the other side.

Okay,

we're going to come down to the other side.

Okay, we're going to come down to the other side.

Okay, we're going to come down to the other side.

All right,

it's time.

I'm Professor Darden. I wasn't here for you last week.

Sorry, I was out of the country, but I'm back now,

ready to do this.

Hopefully you are too.

I'm gonna try to get you through a lot of stuff today because the

lecture is already pretty tight and then I didn't get to talk at

you on Thursday so we don't really know each other too well

yet.

But I'm gonna try to squeeze all that in there.

If I do run out of time we'll have to overlap it and pick it

up on Thursday.

All right so this is how I That's kind

of an interesting dude up there.

You see that on his channel,

there are like 327 videos,

and each one of those videos is him sitting in a room,

like you see there,

mostly about four hours.

He just sits there and he smiles.

That's why the name of the channel is called Sitting and

Smiling.

So I don't have the time to sit and smile for four hours, and

I don't expect many of you do either,

but smiling is this amazing thing

that does stuff mentally and physically

to you when you smile. So, I'd like to start out

lecture here with you all and me

sitting,

I'll be standing,

and smiling.

You only got to do it for like five seconds,

but you got to get that smile all the way up there and just

like be looking at, you don't have to look at me, look at

something if you want to. If you look right in the eye,

you can do that too.

But the smiling thing sets your body up for success.

It's gonna make you feel better.

It does all kind of things when you smile, so

That's where we start

So let's try that for right now, and I'll just count it down on

my fingers and then During that time you just smile you can

think about something if you want you can think about nothing

if you want But smiling still makes a difference so here.

We go smile it out. I'm looking at you

All right, see how easy that was?

Next step,

imposter syndrome, we're always on the road to getting

better.

So,

when I got time or when I can remember it,

I like to start you out with something there too, right?

Something real simple like,

I'll say a thing and then you turn around and say the same

thing,

right? So, I'll say,

I'm good enough to be here.

I'm good enough to be here.

Then you try and somebody nearby and say,

you're good enough to be here.

You're good enough to be here.

That's right, I'm serious,

this shit ain't real.

This is not a joke.

We're trying to get better at this, right?

We'll feel better when we know where we're supposed to be.

If you have some time later tonight,

spend four hours in a, no.

All right, so this is sitting and smiling dude and you see

like he'll just,

he gets in,

he gets himself all set up,

gets all adjusted.

It's gonna be a lot of sitting,

right? So he gets it right.

Sits there, it's different rooms, different places.

and then it gets to the smile and just holds it for like

four hours so you can do some smiling throughout the day I

like to do some smiling when I really need it like when I'm

pissed off or when I'm angry that's pissed off I'm upset

you know smiling even I'll just be walking one of the ones I do

too is I'm just gonna smile all the way to the bathroom, right?

If I see somebody, I'll be smiling.

If I don't see anybody, sometimes I'll be looking at

people.

Sometimes I'll just be looking over people's heads,

smiling,

that smile will make you feel better.

There he goes,

four more hours of this, and that's how he goes.

So that's part of what we're gonna do here is get our smile

on,

fight our imposter syndrome,

and then we're gonna go to work on some 281,

all right? So one of the things that's really important to me is

you doing well.

So I'm going to be working on how you can do well in this

course, obviously by teaching the material, but we also want

to be successful because in the end it's not what you

know,

it's what you can show that you know,

right? If you know all this stuff and you can't show it,

nobody's going to pay you to do it,

right?

You know all this stuff and you can't show it,

your GPA isn't going to be what you think it should be.

So we're trying to get you there, and I'll be working on

that all the way through here. Up to the exam,

we'll be working on getting this exam right, because I've got

some strategies that I like to use and impart upon people.

hopefully you can get something from it and we'll get you moving

forward that way so this is the first content lecture here

number two it's about stacks and queues is where we get started

here on the front I've got this strangely sideways picture of

Pringles I don't know why it's always been sideways who knows

but if you ever had Pringles they come in a stack They're a

little stack of things that also include potatoes among all of

the many ingredients inside Pringles.

But they're in a stack, and over here on the right-hand side,

I got a piece of ancient technology

that you might not recognize.

It's one of the very early Netflix websites.

So on Netflix,

when Netflix first started,

they were a snail mail operation, And they would snail

mail you a DVD and that's how you watch the movie.

And then when you're done watching the movie,

you put it back in the envelope and you snail mail it back to

them.

But the stuff that you wanted to watch, you put in this big old

queue.

And so whenever a movie became available and you had enough,

because you could buy how many discs you would be out at a

time, maybe one movie or three movies at a time.

So whenever you had Headspace having returned enough videos

and there was something,

they would take it here from the top and say, well, that's what

you're gonna get.

But this is how Netflix started. It's amazing to think that we

used to do that.

So on the front of these, sometimes we'll get some fun

stuff,

ancient technology,

strange food stuffs, but they usually have something related

to what we're doing. So this is a cue.

The first thing that you put in the cue is the first thing that

comes out.

Those of you that are from the UK

might think of standing on a queue.

Those of us here in the United States,

we just stand in line.

But it's the same thing.

First person that gets there is the first person that gets

served.

So let's talk about it.

We'll start with these sort of intro slides here.

We'll have a chance to set anything up.

Then we'll talk about it.

The QR code that you see here is the short, chapterized videos

that I made during COVID, so they're all studio stuff,

just me in a studio.

But you can scan this to pick up that section.

So if we get to a thing and you want to know where it is, this

is on the front and the back of it, and then you can go check

out that thing in particular.

So we'll start here with data structures and abstract data

types, which we lovingly abbreviate as ADTs.

So when we're trying to store and organize our data, we gotta

figure out how to get this done.

An abstract data type is how we usually communicate this

information,

right? It combines the valid data that can be used and also

the operations that can be performed.

That's what an abstract data type is.

It's one of the worst definitions I've ever heard,

but after you get past how bad that definition is, it still

covers what you need to have.

All the data that can be used and the valid operations that

can be done on it. So for example,

insert and delete are two types of operations.

So you can think of,

I want to add something to this container, I want to remove

something from this container, or this collection or however

you want to think about it,

and these are the things that the abstract data type has.

But it also has to say, well,

you can't just insert anything in there, right? This is a

collection of integers. So the abstract data type might

say, well, this includes the type of thing that I can put in

there and what I can do with it. Maybe I can sort them,

maybe I can search for a thing, but the interface that gets

defined by the abstract data type is what's important.

Then if we go into data structures, that's kind of what

we do in this course, is now a concrete implementation of an

abstract data type. So there's a thing called a

queue in theoretical terms, but then there's also a container

called the queue in the STL.

And they're similar,

one is the implementation of the other's interface,

right? So the implementation is the data structure,

that's real code,

the abstract data type, that's an interface,

that's a story we tell and things we like to discuss.

All right, how about measuring performance? That's gonna be

probably the most painful thing that you deal with for at least

these first three projects, because the autograder in this

course grades for correctness,

but also is really tough on bad coding practices.

When you do things inefficiently,

it measures it and then complains about it and marks you

down.

You'll be trying all through this first project to make sure

that your project doesn't run too slow,

doesn't use too much memory,

but when we start trying to figure out how am I going to

implement a thing,

we always have to figure out how that's going to work because our

plan is,

let's not code this up,

realize that it sucks,

and then try to fix it,

right? The plan is,

let's think about it,

make some good plans, and then implement something that's going

to be useful. So as we go into talking about

these containers or arrays,

sorry,

these containers or algorithms, all the stuff, we're gonna have

to figure out how it happens.

And so our primary design choices have to deal with where

does the data get stored and how.

So we've got the two primary ways, which is like contiguous

memory.

This thing is right next to that thing, is right next to that

thing in memory. Contiguous,

they're all touching.

Or connected,

think linked list.

Here's one item and it points to where the next one is and then

that one points to where the one after that is,

and that one points to the one after that.

So,

there's contiguous or connected, and how those things get

implemented affect both the run time capabilities of containers

and algorithms, and also the memory usage.

So, we'll be checking those things out.

We want to know how much time it takes to perform some operation

in a sort of abstract sense, because we know if this thing is

going to take me linear time to do,

and I have to do it linear times, then there's n squared

behavior,

right?

So we'll look at what time it takes to say, well,

if n squared is gonna be okay, then I can implement it with

this. How much space is it gonna take?

So we'll be doing all of this stuff through probably the worst

section of the course for most people here.

This is the part where I also have a lot of fun throughout the

semester,

making fun of everyone's favorite course,

EECS 203.

So,

I love EECS 203,

I used to teach that course.

Loved it,

but I like making fun of it too.

So,

the reason why I say this is the worst part of the course is this

is the part that's most like 203,

the complexity analysis stuff. So,

apologies to any EECS 203 IAs that are in the room with us

here, we usually have some.

Like I said, I love your course and your instructors,

all the things. But I'm still going to tease

you.

So complexity analysis is the stuff that's least like code.

Most of the stuff we do in the first half, somebody told me the

midterm exam is kind of like the 203 test, and the final exam is

kind of like the 280 test.

It's kind of how it works. We get much more into the,

not that we're not gonna be coding all semester, but the

more codey-based stuff is in the second half,

the more thought-based theory stuff is gonna be in the first

half. So complexity analysis is really

tough because it's not that hard to do, But it's really hard to

write good test questions for.

And the test questions kind of have to be a little opaque

because it's really hard to write a test question

that just doesn't give away the answer.

It's not really obvious. And so we don't know if you know

something. And so we're not trying to be

really tricky with the complexity analysis questions,

but they tend to be clunky.

They take points off of people's exams, you know, in a way that

we would hope that they wouldn't, but complexity

analysis is gonna be tough.

All right here's an example of some analysis.

What you see here is a linked list.

I got a pointer to the front,

I got a pointer out the back.

The question is how many operations are needed to insert

a value at the end of this singly linked list?

Right then the second question is can you generalize this for a

list with n elements?

All right so when we start out with something like this and say

well the first thing I do I say access that first pointer to see

if there's something there if it's not null I can go ahead and

do that I can go and pull that thing out it's got a pointer so

I can check to see if

that's a null pointer it's not so then I can go access this

next data item and see if it's got a pointer when I check to

see that's not a null pointer then I can go access the next

thing and see well it's got a pointer And yes,

it is a null pointer, so now I've found the end and I'm ready

to actually do the insertion. And that's just three simple

steps. I create the object, put the

stuff in it,

and point to it.

So,

to add something to the end of this list,

I would say it's nine steps. And these steps are kind of a

nebulous thing, but sometimes they're an instruction,

sometimes they're a concept, but you can see here that this is

how I'm going to have to move through this.

Every time I've got to deal with one of these nodes, I've got two

things. I've got to go see if it's

available,

then I've got to go to where it tells me.

Right?

So what about the second question? How would you

generalize this for n elements?

This is nine right now.

What is this?

Yeah, yeah.

2n plus 3.

Outstanding.

So when we say this is 2n plus 3, the good news is we know this

is a linear expression,

right?

So that's what it takes to insert something at the end of a

linked list when I don't have a tail pointer,

it's going to cost me linear time.

The 2n plus 3, we know those are numbers,

the 2 and the 3, and those are going to vary with how things

get done.

But what's really important in this is,

if I double the length of this list, I'm gonna be doing twice

as much work, essentially.

That's why we care about linear functions.

If it's quadratic and I double the length of the list,

then I'm gonna be doing four times as much work.

And that's what complexity analysis is all about.

We're gonna try to figure out what are the right operations

because I need the container to do what I need it to do so

that's probably the most important thing.

The right operations, can I put something, I can't even put

something into this container? Well,

what good is a container, can't put anything in it? Well,

we'll figure out what can we do. Then we've got to figure out if

it does it the right way.

Sure, I can put something into a queue, but if I want it to

behave like a stack,

that doesn't help me. It's the right operation, but

it's the wrong behavior.

So I get the right behavior, and then we go for trade-offs on the

runtime and memory complexities,

right?

And so that's where I'm going to make these choices.

You'll see a bunch of times throughout 281,

half our questions,

the answer's gonna be,

it depends.

It depends,

like what does your data look like?

It depends,

should I put it like this or should I do it like that? It

depends, and what's gonna make you good at answering questions

on the exam is,

when you say,

well,

I know that this answer depends and here's the things that it

depends on and if it's this one, that's the right answer, but if

it's that one, that's the right answer.

So that's what we're gonna be doing here as we try to figure

out what's the right thing to do

Those are the things that it depends upon

We'll be looking at some other concerns like how do I protect

my data limit the interface to avoid some problems?

We can't insert something in the middle of a queue.

That would be violating the constraint That is our invariant

there. So some examples of containers

that might be useful. How do I track orders at a fast

food drive-through?

What kind of container would be useful for that?

How do I deal with interrupted phone calls?

I'm a receptionist.

What does the to-do list look like?

How would you store this stuff so it'll be useful and

efficient?

All right, so there's our run-through on what an abstract

data type is, how we'll use them, and what's gonna go on

throughout the rest of this complexity analysis stretch

here.

First container we're going to talk about here is a basic

container,

it's a stack.

We saw it on the front with the chips over here,

we see it with the pancakes,

they're stacked.

But the abstract data type shows me that if I've got these five

things implemented I can say, well, that thing works like a

stack.

Stacks support us inserting and removing items from the same

end, essentially.

I push things in here,

they come out of there.

Like a queue is the opposite, right? You go to the back of the

line,

you come out of the front of the line.

A stack, we put something on the top,

and then the last thing we put on the top is the first thing

out.

So we call it this LIFO structure, last in, first out.

You put it on the top of the stack.

The next thing you take off, you take it off the top of the

stack. So here's my five real interface

methods.

Push,

which is how I add something to the container.

Pop is how I remove the thing that should be removed.

And then top is the thing that gives me a reference to that

element.

And Google Drive might just kill me one day,

but there are some serious font issues going on in the slide.

I am trying not to lose my biscuits.

It was on the last slide, too.

Okay,

so those should be fixed with fonts just for clarity's sake.

That is real sort of function stuff here.

Element by reference to the top. So you have a reference to the

element.

You do not own the element.

but you can get a reference to it.

And then there's a couple of metrics,

size,

which gives me a number, tells me how many things there are,

and empty is just a Boolean telling me yes or no,

size is zero.

Can pop sometimes just return the top element as well?

So in the STL,

that is not the way that it works.

So in some other languages, when you deal with stacks, the

question was,

can pop return the thing? And in some languages it does.

Some languages you can call it in one sort of one method.

You'd be like set my local variable equal to container.pop,

which would give me a copy of it and remove it from the

container. But the STL doesn't work like

that. The STL keeps them separate.

The STL says if you want to look at it, you call top.

If you want to save it, you've got to look at it and save it.

And then to remove it, you separately call pop.

And what you want to do is you really do want to keep those two

things as close together as possible in physical code,

right?

It leads you to really bad practice.

People get grumpy with you when they're looking at your code.

Say, well, you used that thing on the top of the stack but then

you didn't take it out. Was there a reason why?

Was there a reason why you left it in the container

to get to the bottom of the loop to be like, pop?

Well, no.

The last time I needed to access the container was right when I

accessed it.

My new value is equal to container.top.

Pop,

now the only place that it exists is in my local variable,

not in the container.

So you always want to put your tops and pops,

your fronts and pops as close together as possible.

Please do that,

it's helpful.

And like I said,

other people who don't know you will look at your code and feel

like, oh yeah,

they know something,

right? They look at your code and like, I see you top it.

And then page later, I see you pop it.

that's really bad form.

So put your tops and pops together and you got some other

language, you might be lucky enough to have that B1 command,

but not today.

All right,

so some examples of stack-like behavior,

any back feature,

if you think about when you go back in browsing,

you've sort of stacked up a bunch of pages and then you pop

and go back in them. You can stack more,

remove some,

right? There's even that little kind of drop-down thing where

you can jump back like five pages,

right?

But that's still just a speed-up on stack.

If you jump back five pages,

it pops for you and then sticks you at that one, right?

Those other things that you skipped over while backing,

they're gone, so they have been pop, pop, pop, pop.

Now you can have that one. So even that is a stack,

no matter how you get in there and tweak at it,

right?

Any, it says the text editor's undo feature here, but any

editor's undo feature, right?

You're editing something in Photoshop.

You make a change, you make a change, you make a change, you

undo a change, you undo a change, you undo a change.

Right?

That's a stack. So we use stacks all the time in

real life. I'll be trying to point out

stacks and queues and all of the algorithms that we may mess

with. We do them all in real life, all

the time. Some of them we invented when we

were,

I watched my kids when they were two and younger

inventing algorithms.

I mean, we use them now, we formalize them, but we all come

up with some of this stuff.

So, exactly,

that's all it is, right? So the question is, there's a redo,

and all that is is like, we got two stacks, right? We put all

the stuff that we're doing here.

And then as you undo a thing,

it takes it off the top of this stack

and puts it on the bottom of a new stack.

So if you undo two things,

then you want to redo them,

they go back.

It's two stacks.

Yeah.

So that's how undo and redo work together.

Is there any way to get rid of the empty and the expected by

2.0?

No. Oh,

in terms of efficiency in your code?

I mean, because at a conceptual level,

it is that. In some container in project 2B,

you'll be writing a priority queue, and you'll have to

implement empty. And so it'll be your choice at

that point whether you're returning empty as is size equal

to 0 or yeah. I mean, it's the same thing,

right?

But it kind of gets into how you think while coding, right?

If it's empty,

that's a more common way to say, hey,

is that size zero?

We don't think that, you know what I mean?

And the closer to your natural language thought processes you

make your code, the more likely you are to get it right and have

somebody else understand you. So yes,

you can say,

if size is equal to zero,

don't do this thing.

You can also say,

if is empty,

don't do this thing.

But they're equivalent,

especially in terms of execution time.

They're the same execution profile, so you can do whichever

one makes you the most happy.

All right, let's implement a stack here.

And as I mentioned earlier, we're talking about contiguous

memory and connected memory. So as we talk about how do I

make a stack, First let's see what happens when we make it in

contiguous memory and you see here I've got this block of

these five things so you can say that my capacity is five and my

size is three Capacity is how many it can hold

Size is how many I'm holding

So in this case, I've got a base pointer and the top pointer and

you'll see that we keep the top pointer Actually pointing just

past good data. So the top pointer isn't

pointing at the tap just kind of awkward if you think about it

but if you do some calculations and how this is gonna work and

be efficient that's a great place to do it because one of

the things that you do the most is say well what I'm gonna

process this entire thing well Wow Wow for loop I is zero

I is less than size you almost always call dot

size before you do a thing so in the In the case of .size,

how do I calculate .size?

I just take the base pointer and subtract it from the top

pointer.

If the top pointer was pointing at the yellow thing,

how would I get size?

I just take the base pointer, subtract it from the top

pointer,

and then add one.

Twice as many mathematical operations

for my most or second most common operation.

So that's a bad thing. Let's take the thing we do the

most and make it twice as slow

It's better this way right and then what happens when I want to

do a push

When I'm ready to add something in there I say well the top

pointer is ready to go right now you give me something new I

write it at top pointer, and then I plus one I was always

gonna have to plus one

I mean I could have stored at the yellow pointer and say well

write this new thing then I could have moved over and

written it

So it's the same amount of operations as just writing it

and then moving over.

It's just the order of them doesn't really matter in that

case, but not having to do the plus one every time I check my

size is going to be a great way to do it, right?

You also end up with this weird combo of like, what

happens when it's empty?

If my top pointer is pointing at data,

how do I know that I shouldn't access it?

Right, where do I point it so that it's numerically in the

right place so that I can do the size math if I'm used to

pointing at data?

If I point past data then my math is easy.

This minus that, we're done.

So that's why we do that, and it makes these five operations

pretty easy.

Push,

I just write at that location and increment.

We'll skip step one for now, come back to it in a minute.

So just write the element to top pointer and increment top

pointer, it's good.

Pop,

we can decrement the top pointer.

That's all I have to do. So now you say well if I wanted

to pop the yellow thing I would just move the top pointer to be

pointing at it and that would work because I've already got

the agreement that I'm never going to dereference top pointer

so even if top pointer is pointing at the yellow thing

that still means I can't access it.

So just decrementing the top pointer if my container holds

objects I should call the destructor at this time though

because it's no longer available to me so if I've got objects

after I decrement I'll delete the thing if it's an object if

it's not an object it's just a bunch of integers it is minus

minus and I'm done it's there but it's not accessible

top

dereference and return top pointer minus one so that's

where we got to do a little bit of mathy things in there say you

want to copy a top well hold Let me move this over and then give

you that

So that's where that one comes in D reference and return the

top pointer

Size we talked about how we do that and empty is pretty easy as

well. You say well size is zero or

That's when the base pointer in the top pointer are equal

So the question is, this is the top function a little slower

because we have to subtract every time to get there.

Yeah, it would be faster if that thing was just pointing at data,

right?

But then you think, well, how often do I have to get the thing

in the top I do it once, and then my other operations are

faster, right? For every object,

I'm usually only going to top it one time, and that's the time

right before I pop it.

So it is a little slower, but our more common operations,

size and empty,

get sped up because of that.

Yep,

it's good, it's good.

All right,

so how many steps are operations for each method? That's kind of

the question as we try to do some complexity analysis here.

So we'll be thinking about that, then we'll come back to it.

I left one out here.

I said in the push method,

we're skipping step one. Now step one only happens when

my capacity and size are equal when my capacity and size are

equal. I have no more room

So you can't push something in when it's full when capacity is

five and the size is five There's five things sitting in

five baskets and I need to put in a sixth item Right.

So that's where it says here if needed

Allocate a bigger array and copy the data over there So, when it

comes time to push, if size is equal to capacity, I will go get

a whole new container that's twice the size,

put all the old data in there,

and then I can start sticking things into that.

So, that's where the one happens sometimes,

right? And so, that's important to think about, and that one

says, well, how many steps does that take?

Oh, did you ruminate?

All right.

Connected memory.

Here's a stack in what is essentially a linked list,

We've got a head pointer and I've got a size as

well, so I'm going to be keeping the size with it,

that way I don't have to recalculate the size.

So every time I push,

I increment the size, every time I pop,

I decrement the size, that gives me quick access to size.

So in this case,

we're going to keep all of our accesses, remember stacks only

need to access one end so I'm gonna push things on one end and

I'm gonna pop them from the same end pretty easy then push just

says create something new and inserted that head pointer

increment the size top or pop sorry

the thing that I'm pointing at is the thing I want to get rid

of so take my pointer point past it and then delete that thing

top the head pointers pointing at Just dereference.

We're good.

Size,

if I'm storing that size separately,

I just return that value.

If I choose not to store that size separately,

then what do I have to do?

I can start at the front, and next, next, next, next, next,

next till I get to the end.

That's how I count the size.

Empty just says, is size equal to zero? Here we can be checking

our size variable.

Or you can also just say, well, if the head pointer is a null

pointer,

then same thing. It's empty.

So you can do that one either way.

You can implement that using either one of those if you store

the size.

All right.

So,

yeah?

I noticed that the last element, the top element, is at the end

pointer.

Why did we do that instead of putting it at the last?

Good question, right?

Why wouldn't we put the newest item at the end there? Well,

we already did that thing. And the very first thing was, it

takes me 2n plus 3 steps to put something at the end.

And then it's going to take me 2n steps to go find the thing to

get rid of it. So if we store our newest data

at what feels like the end,

then every one of our activities is linear in time, where if we

store it in the front here,

everything is constant in time. I'm pointing at it.

I put it here,

right? So that's why it's it's it's it's a great question And

that's the the crux of what we're trying to get at when we

implement these things. Why would I do it this way?

Well, it depends if I put it over there all my operations are

linear, but put it over here All my inner operations are constant

time

All right, so yeah

Well, if you implement it that way you can that's very true so

if I wanted to implement it with essentially a tail pointer,

some pointer that was pointing at the last object,

then I could go that route.

It would be just the same as accessing one or the other.

So in this simplified version, we said all we really need to

get this done is a tail pointer. If you wanted to do it the other

way, you could.

If we use a tail pointer,

wouldn't popping be linear because we'd have to go to the

second to last element?

Exactly,

exactly. So that's a good point here.

So if we had a tail pointer,

popping would still be linear because this is a singly linked

list, right?

If I go to the last item, hey, great, it's real cheap and easy

to insert there,

but how do I remove the thing here?

I gotta tell the thing before me, I'm gone.

And the only way to do that is start at the beginning and next,

next, next, next, next till I get there.

So pop still is linear, even if I have a tail pointer, as long

as I've just got singly linked list, right?

If I got doubly linked list,

now if I'm pointing at the last item, I'm gonna say, okay,

previous,

we're out.

So, and that's what it is. As we talk about these

implementations,

well, what does that mean? Well, if I'm gonna go with an

implementation that's doubly linked,

now I've got some freedoms that I didn't, but I've also got

twice the memory overhead.

So now I have a pointer in each direction.

Eight bytes per pointer and I'm up to 16 bytes of overhead per

node. And,

you know, if I've just got a linked list of integers,

I got a four-byte integer and 16 bytes for the pointers,

that ain't so great.

Yes, and yes. Why would that be more of an

operation to determine size rather than the integer? I mean,

like, eight times the size of the integer.

That's what I'm saying. This version actually does keep

size separately. But that's still a design

decision.

Like, if you want to say,

well,

I would like to trade memory for time, I'm going to save some

memory. But every time somebody asks me

the size it's gonna cost me in time to go calculate that So

we'll be doing that trade-off a lot throughout our code You'll

be it's really hard to get both a memory improvement and the

time improvement because if you think about it, what's

happening?

Well, I calculate this once and I store it

Now the next time I don't have to spend so much time

calculating. I just go look it up It's

faster, but if I can't stand to store all this stuff Well, then

I can save a whole lot of memory But every time you ask me a

question, I'm going to have to go work on it.

So we'll have the time and memory trade off a lot.

You have one here?

Yep, that's good.

All right,

sweet.

All right,

so here's what they look like stacked up.

You see how I did that?

All right,

push is constant or linear when

I resize in the contiguous memory.

and it's just playing constant all the time in the linked list.

The rest of them are all just constant all the time unless I

don't track my size in the linked list.

But nowadays we've got plenty of memory.

It's way easier to just track the size,

save the time on size.

So you can look at those things and say,

well,

they're almost all the same except for that really slow

linear thing when I do the vector version.

So it looks like I should probably do the linked version.

And that's where we get from analysis to execution because on

an analysis phase,

you say, yeah, that's probably a better idea.

But it turns out that when actual execution is happening,

vectors are still more efficient than linked lists.

It has to do with the way that processors are built.

They go access memory.

They usually realize,

hey, if you're access a thing there's a good chance you're

gonna access some other things near it so it's faster than to

just go read four bytes let me just go read 2k go grab 2k I

grab all that stuff over here now it's not in storage it's in

memory and the memory is faster than storage so we get it into

memory we get it into our cache even which is even better so

it's really close there so as I go to the next thing and when

it's in the cache it's super-fast so

Though the thing that we call this when we have this behavior

where sometimes it's lit

My mom no, it's my wife

Tell these people

All right, it'll be one of them all right

So So when I have this behavior where sometimes it's constant

and other times it's linear,

that's a special type of analysis and we call that

amortized constant,

right? And that's when I have one really expensive operation

that supports a lot of cheap operations and it's the same

operation.

So in the case of an insert when it's full, it takes me linear

time to do that.

But then once I do that, if I make the container big enough,

I get a whole bunch of cheap ones after that.

So when I got this one really expensive one followed by a

bunch of cheap ones,

we call that amortized constant.

It looks like a constant over a bunch of runs is how that works.

So it turns out that the asymptotic complexities are

pretty similar.

The constant factors attached to dealing with this contiguous

memory are smaller than the constant factors attached to my

connected memory. That's the crux of it there.

They're faster because the constants are smaller We've

talked earlier like 2n plus 3 think 2n plus 3 is linear But so

is 47 n plus 12 also linear, but certainly slower than 2n plus 3

So it's kind of how this is going here.

These constants are constant. They're bigger constants So it's

gonna be better to use this thing Says the linked list has

higher memory overhead as well because I've got these pointers

I got, you know, if I had a linked list of booleans,

each booleans one byte,

even if it's singly linked list, each pointer's eight bytes.

Memory overhead.

So we'll be thinking about that. And as one of the things that

I'll often say, if you're thinking about using a linked

list in 281,

what part of,

do not disturb,

do not disturb zone.

If you're thinking about using a linked list in 281,

you should probably come talk to me because you've got some bad

idea,

right?

Linked lists are not inherently bad,

but there's just no really good reason to use one in 281.

So that's what it is. I'll tell you about times when

linked lists are good. I'm going to stop this.

No, there we go.

Tell you when times when linked lists are good,

but none of those times will be in 281.

Is there like a pretty big risk of like taking up memory?

Yeah,

yeah, that's one right there. So the question is,

well, when I push and I make it bigger, if I double it,

isn't that crazy sometimes? It turns out,

you know, if you're off by a factor of two in most

situations, you're not too bad. I mean, unless you're building a

bridge, right?

And then you're like, well,

that ends in the water.

That's a bad factor of two.

It's a bad factor of two. But if your bridge kinda goes

way longer than the river, at least you get on the other side.

But in general,

a factor of two isn't too bad.

I say that until you go buy a car.

Like, well, I'm not gonna pay $200,000 for this car.

But when we're talking about memory and execution times,

those factors of two turn out to be okay, right?

It's usually if you run out of space,

you are on your way to about twice as many of those anyway,

right?

And then if you run out of space again, then maybe you're on your

way to twice as many of those.

There's always the case that if you know the size

ahead of time, or have any way of knowing,

if you can set that ahead of time, you will do better on

memory. So a lot of our inputs you'll

see in 281 will tell you, here's the size of the ship, or here's

the size of the map.

So you can say ahead of time,

this is what I need to build this map,

right?

So whenever you know ahead of time, always reserve a resize.

If you don't know, then this multiplying by two behavior

actually works out to be pretty good.

Yep?

How do I elaborate on the

factors being bigger or smaller here?

It has to do with the cache, right?

So when you go load something,

like I said,

it grabs a bunch of stuff around there.

So you say,

let me square brackets one.

It says, well, let me go grab square brackets one through 50

and sticks them in there. The next one is right there in

the cache, and you get it really quick, right?

You can't do that with a linked list, because it'll say,

well,

you just asked for memory in this area, let me get a bunch of

memory around that,

great. And then you say, well, where's

your next pointer?

My next pointer's over there.

Say, okay, well, let's throw away all this stuff we put into

memory, and then go get a bunch of memory from over here.

And then where's your next pointer?

Oh, we'll throw that away.

And so you end up with these things that are called cache

misses.

What you're looking for is not in the cache, and then you have

to reload the cache. and then that's the sort of

thing that slows you down, is those accessing of things.

Whereas I know that I've got an iterator,

a pointer, or an index, I'm looking at a thing,

the next one is just plus one later, and I'm there.

So it's faster,

I don't have to do another huge memory access a lot of times, I

just keep it in the cache.

All right.

So yes. That

is

totally an implementation lover's dream there.

I have no idea how that does. I mean,

it's obviously going to be dependent on the size of the

thing.

Because if I go,

if I got say, I've got 2K that I'm going to put in there.

If I got 2K and it's just a vector of integers, I'm going to

get a whole bunch of integers, right?

But if I got 2K and I got this thing that's like 120 bytes,

then I'm only going to get four or five of them into memory.

but it does the best that it can, right? It still will be

speeding you up. And it's something that, like I

said, is totally implementation dependent.

And if you get into the deep, deep end, you can start making

some processor do that stuff, but that's not where we're at

here, so.

All right,

next up,

how do I get a stack?

Oh, the fonts are just broken.

Include stack,

super easy.

Is it include stack, gets your standard stack.

But what's pretty cool about stack is it's not even really

that well implemented.

Stack is what's known as an adapter class.

So this adapter class doesn't do anything.

It takes some other container that does stuff and adapts it to

look like a stack.

So as long as your underlying container can provide

push back,

back,

and pop back,

then you can say, well, I can wrap that in a stack.

And so we say push.

The stack says, well, I'm going to use push back on that thing.

You say top, and you say, well, I'm going to use back on that

thing.

You say pop, I'm going to use pop back on that thing.

Vectors do all three of those things, which is why I can

implement a stack either myself with a vector or I can have the

stack class wrap a vector and behave like a real stack with a

real stack interface.

By default stacks are wrapped around decks.

We'll talk about decks in a bit.

So the default container is the deck because the deck provides

push back, back,

and pop back.

So I can make one.

So does the vector.

So I can do it on either one of those.

And so does the list.

So if I really wanted to,

I could say,

make me a stack,

but use a linked list to do it. It's got some design reasons why

I've got these really large objects.

I don't want them moving around in memory.

Keep them where they are. Use this linked list.

All right,

stack will do that for you.

So if you don't say anything, you say, give me a stack of

integers,

what you're really saying is give me a stack of integers held

as a deck of integers.

If you want, you could say,

give me a stack of integers held as a vector of integers.

Once again,

you'll have no reason to do that in 281,

but it's worth noting that that's a thing that you can do.

All right?

That should wrap the stack.

Onto the queue.

Queues,

slides, and stack slides are only slightly different.

The primary difference here is a little bit of wording.

You see here now we're talking about a FIFO order,

first in,

first out.

This is what I talk about standing.

The other thing that I like talking about the most is lunch.

So all my examples about stand in a lunch line,

or you want to get some of the, my lunch is on my brain here,

sorry, so.

But you go stand in a line at lunch, and you're pretty happy

when you get there before a whole bunch of other people show

up.

You ever done that, you get to a restaurant, a whole bunch of

people show up after you?

Like, well, great, it's a good thing that this place doesn't

serve stacks,

because they'd all get served before I did.

They serve queues, right? So I got here before them,

I get served before them. That's a good thing.

So that's what a queue is. You see the only difference here

in the naming if we've got a push and a pop and a size and an

empty,

but instead of a top,

as we get off of stacks,

we've got a front.

Get something from the front of the cue.

Our push goes to the back,

our pop comes from the front so pop removes the thing from the

front and front gives us a reference to that thing there.

So,

waiting in line for lunch,

adding songs to the end of a playlist,

these are cue-like behaviors.

Drive-through at McDonald's.

So, let's get to implementing one.

We've got there two ways. We can implement in contiguous

memory.

We can implement in connected memory.

We'll start with contiguous memory.

Back to the restaurant.

If you own a restaurant,

anybody here a family restaurant?

Nobody?

Yeah, family restaurant.

You know,

there's some maximum number of tables you have at the

restaurant.

Maybe you got a good restaurant, 20 tables.

Does that mean that you can only serve 20 people all day?

Of course not.

You've been to a restaurant before that served more people

before you got there. What do they do?

They go clean off a table and they sit you in that table.

So,

we still have this concept of a queue, but how we store it in

contiguous memory is a little bit more challenging than it is

with a stack.

With a stack, I write,

write, write, write, write, write,

read, read, read, read, read, read, read, read, read.

With a queue,

though,

I got to write here and read there and write here and read

there and write here and read there and write here and read

there.

Once I get all the tables used in a restaurant, I don't sit

people in the parking lot, right? I just clean some tables

and say, well, this one's done.

You're back over here.

We call this a circular buffer. It's also referred to as a ring

buffer,

discussed in 280.

So here you see I've got a capacity 3.

I've got size 0.

I'm keeping my size stored on the side there.

I have got these two.

They look like arrows.

You can call them pointers, but really we are using indexes.

You can use pointers or indexes. They work the same here.

Here, since I know that the capacity is three,

right, that is stored somewhere, it is just not here on the

slide. But I know when I ask for my

memory, how much memory I have. So I know my capacity is three.

And this circular array,

when I get to the end, I am just going to go back to the

beginning.

Pretty easy.

Fill,

fill,

fill,

go back to the beginning,

right?

So the back index is equal to front index.

I'm one of two things.

The back index is equal to front index, I'm either empty or I'm

full.

The only way I can tell is by checking my size.

If my size is equal to my capacity, then I know that I'm

full. If my size is equal to zero,

then I know that I'm empty. So since the back index is the

front index,

I know that I'm empty when it comes time to push something.

I write at the back and

increment the back When I write another one in there right at

the back and increment the back

So every time I do something with these pointers, it's just

like the other pointers or indexes I write there because

it's not pointing at good data and then I increment in the

circular buffer case

when I do that increment there's also this hidden mod thing there

when I get to the end if I've plus plussed and plus plus then

I hit the end the next time I plus plus I don't go past that I

go back to the beginning all right so here we are at push B

what happens now I've pushed C you see back index and front

next are the same if I were to push at this point and write

something more I would definitely be overwriting good

data because now I say, you know,

the back index is never pointing at good data.

Well, it is pointing at good data.

It's not the data that I want right now.

So if I write at back index now, I've totally flubbed it because

I'll have lost A.

So when it comes time to pop,

what I do, I just read from the front.

The front is pointing at the thing you want.

The back is not.

Where I enter things is not pointing at it.

Where I get things from is.

So when it comes time to read the front index, I can just read

at front index if I want to remove a thing I just plus plus

the front index if I get to the end I wrap around the beginning

Circular buffer here. So now we've popped we removed a

see it's it's a question mark there because the value a More

than likely is still sitting right there in memory Memory

doesn't get cleaned up just gets forgotten about so when nobody's

pointing at that a

it's still a but it's not really dated us so it's kind of like

written here as a question mark because I'm not gonna use it

it's never gonna be accessible to me again I can never get my

front index there with the operations that I have so it's

as good as dead to us push D what happens I write at back

index and increment back index wrapping if necessary so now you

see I've got this here. Now what happens when I want to

push again?

I'm full.

Size is equal to capacity.

I need new space.

So to push E,

I'm going to go get twice as much space in this case.

Now I've got six of them, but I'm also going to unwrap things.

We call it unwrapping,

unrolling it.

We see the front index was started somewhere other than the

physical front of my old container.

So rather than trying to mess with that monkey-ness,

why don't we just take the front index and start that here? So

you see that I've unrolled it, because up there,

it went B, C,

D.

So now when I copy it into the new memory,

I just unroll it. Here's B, C, D.

And now I've got room for E.

So you see what I refer to unrolling it or unwrapping this

stuff here.

I can say that I know that the front index is somewhere.

Let me start reading data from there as I fill the new

container. So now, as it comes time to push

E,

you see that I've gotten room for E now.

And back index, once again, is pointing at nothingness.

I've got a size of six.

I've got a size of four, a capacity of six.

And that's good.

Questions on this one?

Does unwrapping provide any performance boost?

The question is, does unwrapping provide any performance boost?

It's simpler.

It makes your life simpler. because if you didn't want to, I

mean,

for instance, you could have started and written B,

C,

D, and then E here, but you would also have had to declare

this new thing,

move your front to a different spot,

write those things,

and move your... So it's one more operation, so

it's a little bit less efficient to do it this way.

Well,

when you're doubling, you say, well, I'm at size three,

so that's actually where I'm going to write,

right?

Because you say index 0 index 1 index 2.

I've doubled it. I've got room for 6 and my back

index is 3

And that's where I go. So you don't even have to do

math on that one. My old size is where I want to

be

Well, the the X is there to refer to the fact that I can't

do it in that container right so D was pointing right there

after inserting D then when it came time to insert E I said

well my size is equal to my capacity so I can't go here I've

got to move into some new new digs yep yep

the ordering

ah right because that was circular,

right?

So,

in this situation, because front is right here,

this was zero,

this was one, and this was two.

Logically.

Physically, no.

Right?

Physically,

they are what they were. So, that's what the unrolling

comes about because the front index is always pointing at it,

and then we plus one and wrap until we get to the end.

And so, that's why they got reordered because we physically

reordered them, but we didn't logically reorder them.

So would you do this by creating a new vector with double the

size and then popping elements?

Yep, that's exactly what you do. The question was,

how would I do this physically? I just create a new vector,

linear copy everybody over from zero,

I mean,

from logical zero to physical zero.

That's what the unrolling is. It's taking a logical zero and

putting it at physical zero.

Yeah,

it's just an artifact,

I don't know why it's still there.

It's not a thing though,

it's not a real thing, yeah.

So the question is, the reason why we do it instead of a stack,

why do we do it circular?

because if I was to do it in some other container where I

only had access to the one end, then I'd have to move

everything.

Every time I insert I'd have to move all of the other things,

right?

Like if I'm only gonna pop off the top here,

how do I get stuff underneath it? I have to move everything.

So now my insertion cost me linear time if I'm moving things

out of the way.

Yeah.

The size doesn't actually matter here, right? I could have,

so you're talking about a size four or capacity four?

Capacity four, right?

Yeah,

so I could be,

like here, this could be my front index,

and you know, if this is also my back index,

then logically this is still going to be zero,

one,

two,

three, like that, because it's just wrapping around.

Does that make sense?

Yeah, I was wondering,

like,

because it's the middle two,

I guess,

elements instead of just one,

instead of even,

instead of top.

Like, but it doesn't matter if it's one,

it's just one for,

like, zero.

Well, the front index is a thing, right? I'm keeping track

of the front index at all times to tell me where I am.

Because this could be even and 40 items long, right? I would

still have this is where my front is, and this is where my

back is. And so this will be 0,

1,

2, 3, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah,

n minus 1.

You see what I mean? So it's not about the middle.

It's about where is front.

And then as I work my way around through all the items, I have to

wrap around at the end.

All right?

Here one?

No?

Good.

And then there one.

So, for the bottom example, if you pop B, C, and D, and then

insert three more elements,

would that just make it a capacity to do that?

Well, no, I mean, because the question is, so if I pop B, C,

and D, and then I push three more, I can always still wrap.

I mean, because if I pop B, C, and D, it's like people just

left these tables.

I can serve at those tables, right? So,

hey,

hey,

come back.

So if I get to pop in B, C, and D,

right, and then I want to come sit F,

G,

and H,

right, and then my front would be here,

because that's the next thing to come out,

and my back would be here, because that's just after good

data.

And so that's what would happen every,

because remember,

as I pop,

I say, here's the thing,

plus plus front index.

Here's the thing,

plus plus front index.

Because that jumps me back in,

forward in time with the plus plus thing.

It's good?

Sweet,

yeah?

Good,

all right, so that's circular buffer.

Not a huge thing, but when we talk about how can I do it

physically in contiguous memory without the circular buffer,

then, like I said, every time somebody new shows up to the

restaurant,

I gotta go build a new table.

I gotta build a new table, and we're all the way into the

neighbor's parking lot just because I got three people at

the restaurant, and they're all sitting at tables in the

neighbor's parking lot because we use the tables inside the

restaurant. That doesn't make any sense,

right? So that's why we need the circular buffer there to get

that right.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Well, the circular has to do when you're not running out of

space, right? Because when you're actually at 20 tables and

you have 20 customers in the real restaurant,

you don't double the size of the restaurant.

You just tell some people to wait,

right? You gotta wait until we can serve you.

But in the case of the circular nature here,

once I get my restaurant up to a certain size,

I never really run out of capacity,

right?

Once I've got a big enough restaurant,

it's just not my lunch crowd is never going to be 400 at a time.

My lunch cow might be like 40, and so I got 45 tables,

then that's all the tables I need.

And from the rest of my behavior there,

then it's circular. So when I run out of space,

you're right,

it's still just some in-order memory.

But while I'm in the space that I can use,

then I'm going to behave on that circularly.

Every time I push,

I write here,

increment, and wrap.

Every time I pop,

I delete there,

increment,

and wrap.

And so when I don't run out of space,

then it is circular.

When I run out of space, all bets are off.

We just got to get new space.

But then we'll treat that space circularly.

You keep track of size and capacity.

You can ask a container,

if you ask a vector,

dot size.

You probably haven't used vector dot capacity, but it's always

been there. it tells you how many can I

hold.

And that's something that I know, because when I said I

needed to have the system allocate me some memory to hold

this thing, I said, well,

get me enough to hold six of them.

So somewhere, I know that I have six spaces.

And if I've also stored that I'm currently using four of them,

I can then behave accordingly. I know that when size is equal

to capacity,

I can't push unless I unroll.

all right pop there we go so here's our

implementation and this one is going to use the circular array

I've got this front index and back index you see that it says

my capacity is up there it's five my size is three so now I

know that when I push an element if size is equal to capacity

this is the step one of the previous one I'm full let's go

get some new memory

unroll it as I go this puts my physical zero and my logical

zero at same data item.

Other than that though, I can just copy the back index and

increment the size and the back index and wrap around as needed.

If I get to capacity,

I'm always taking my back index

back index plus plus mod capacity.

So back index plus plus mod capacity goes zero one two,

three,

four,

zero.

Because four goes to five,

five mod five is zero. So zero, one, two, three, four,

zero, one, two, three, four,

zero, one, two, three, four.

That's why we call it the circular thing right there.

Pop, delete the element,

and decrement the size,

and increment front index.

That's what pop's all about.

Front,

whatever front index is pointing at.

Size gives me that size that I've stored in a variable.

And then in this case,

because the two pointers are out there floating around,

the only way to know if this is empty is if my size is equal to

zero. Because those two pointers could

be pointing at each other. Those two indexes could be the

same.

When it's full or when it's empty.

So just where they are isn't enough to tell me whether or not

it's empty. I have to have that separately

in size.

Connected memory.

Now you see I've got this tail pointer because I do need to

access both ends. something goes on the back and

comes out of the front so I've got a tail pointer

and I've got a head pointer let's keep things logical I'll

put things at the back after the tail I'll read things from the

front the head now I can do these things in constant time

when it comes time to add something new I create it have

tail pointers next point at it that's how I push when it comes

time to pop I say well head pointers pointing at it head

pointer point at head next,

delete head,

we're good.

There's a temp in there.

Don't get it twisted.

But pretty easy.

I don't need two directions because I'm only accessing this

side to do this thing and accessing that side to do

another thing.

Right? I'm writing in the back and reading from the front.

So once again,

here we are, same chart, looks the same,

all the asymptotic studies that we've done here are the same.

These are all constant except when I have to expand

over the life of the container,

we call that asymptotic constant.

Did I say that right?

No, that's wrong.

Amortized constant, I'm like, that word did not sound right,

all right.

Amortized constant, when I can do that really expensive linear

copy of these 50 things,

But since I doubled it, that means I got 50 really cheap ones

because I've got room for them.

And so that's why the amortized complexity analysis says that

over the life of the container, it feels like things happen in a

constant matter.

So it feels like it's constant,

and because the constants here are smaller than there,

once again, we're going to take our contiguous memory more often

than not.

All right,

how do I get a queue?

Include queue, just like before,

it's pretty good.

Now, you can see that the queue has a default underlying

container, same as the stack.

It uses the deck.

Why? Because the deck has push back,

front,

and pop front.

The deck supplies those three things.

I can't wrap a vector because Because the vector has push

back,

it has front,

does not have pop front.

So lists do,

decks do, by default you get a deck,

always use the deck,

unless you need something crazy and that's not going to be us

here.

All right,

so there's queues,

basic container queue.

You've heard about it,

let's talk about it. Deck there it is see that word

It's a made-up word

It's a made-up word, but the way that we pronounce it is like

deck like a deck of cards

What is it for it's for double

Ended

Q

That's what a deck is

Like it says here,

it's pronounced dec,

D-E-Q-U-E-U-E, as in double ended Q,

is actually another word.

DQ is how you take something out of line.

So you DQ somebody,

now they can't get lunch.

So we don't want to make anything too confusing because

you say, well, am I declaring a thing or am I doing some action?

They simplify it and say, well,

we'll call this deck without the additional UE.

So, that's where the name comes from, and if you wanna use

standard deck,

it's pretty easy.

You just include deck,

right? What's so cool about a deck?

Well, it's got push back, pop back, back,

push front, pop front, and front,

all of those in constant time.

That's pretty impressive.

Vectors can't do that.

Vectors can't push on the front in constant time.

They can access the front,

they can access the back,

but they can only access the front for reading in constant

time.

That can allow you to do both.

And we've got size and empty, that's great.

We can even traverse it using an iterator, meaning we can go

through them in sequence.

And if you use the STL version,

it's got a constant time operator square brackets.

So I can find something even in the middle of it in constant

time. So this sounds like the magic

bullet,

doesn't it? We should just always use this container

because it does everything so fast.

Yes and no,

right?

Because the way that decks actually work

is they are partially connected

and partially contiguous,

right? And if I was to do this,

you see I could do this with a circular buffer,

and I could sort of write things into both ends and pop things

like that. I could do that pretty easily,

right, and I run out of space. I could even say, well, I've

popped these things way into the middle.

I'm here. I wanted to write some more.

I could still be sticking things on there.

So I could have a circular buffer, which would make things

even more confusing.

But it could be done.

I could have a circular buffer version of it.

I can also have a doubly-linked list version.

As long as I got a tail pointer, I can read and write things here

at the end. I can read and write things here

at the front and do that.

But then I've got all these pointers hanging around there.

The real way that it gets done is much more like these things

you see here. It is connected, and it is

contiguous.

So I've got these things that are lovingly called chunks,

and a chunk will hold some number of items.

Where that number comes from,

these are what people who go to school to write libraries to

figure out.

I don't know what that number is.

You can't control it.

So you see here, if I've got this chunk layout,

and the interesting thing is the first chunk

fills from back to front.

The last chunk fills normally, like you might expect from front

to back.

But you see here, if I wanted to push front,

what could I do? I could just write something in front of data

zero

and then point to it and say, hey, look, I can do that in

constant time. I just write a new thing here

and think of this as the new zero.

If I wanna push something on the back, I just write it here after

data eight,

and it works just fine in constant time.

If I wanna remove one,

I can remove things from zero,

then one, and then two.

If I get that entire chunk empty, then I just move on to

the next chunk and say, well, now this chunk is the only one

that has stuff that I care about.

If I run out of space, What if I push, push,

push back, push back, push back, push back?

Well, I don't have to move them. I just go get another chunk.

And then tell this thing over here, which we call the map,

not to be confused with the data type map,

but this map helps me find things,

helps me locate my chunks. So when I want to add a new

chunk at the end, I just grab a new block of chunk size and

start writing into that one.

So is this implemented using chunks so that we need to

allocate a new one faster?

Well, it's a really complex type

because it does those constant time operations, right? That's

really what it is.

The question is, why is it implemented in chunks?

Because then my expensive operations don't have to be that

expensive, right?

Because as long as I do it in chunks,

then when I run out of space at the front,

I just go get a new chunk and I don't have to move everybody.

When I run out of space at the back, I don't have to move

everybody, I can just go get a new one.

So are the operations really more like advertised constant?

The operations are still constant time.

They're slower constant time, right? Because now if I know

that I want to go access

square brackets four in a vector,

I start at the beginning,

I move over four, and there it is.

What if I want to access square brackets 20? I start at the

beginning,

I move over 20,

and there it is.

Physically the beginning is always zero, And physically,

20 is always 20 after the beginning.

In this version, this is another representation of it.

Here,

those gray things are the ones that actually have data in them.

Where is square brackets 20?

I've got to do a little bit more math.

I've got this shift.

You see that shift up there says 3.

That tells me how many are blank at the beginning of my first

chunk.

And then with my chunk size of 6, I say, well,

oh, it's pretty easy.

If this thing was completely full,

I could just say, well,

how many times does six go into 20?

The 20 mod six, right?

And I'm gonna get, is that square brackets two?

But my shift says, well, these first three are blank, so you're

gonna have to move back three as well.

So if I wanted to get square brackets 20,

I would just have to go and find

where is this 23rd item,

figure out which chunk that's in, and then go square brackets,

that thing like that. So it's still constant time,

but that discussion was a lot more complicated than add 20 to

the beginning,

right?

So that's why the deck isn't the best thing

since pick a thing.

I don't know, right? Because it's not as fast as a vector.

It's not as fast as a vector.

It's good,

it's just not great.

Vectors are better at contiguous memory because they are one

contiguous chunk.

Here these small chunks require you to jump from chunk to chunk.

As we talked about sticking things in a cache,

you might go read and get a whole chunk in memory.

And then when you get to the end of iterating through those five

things,

where's the next chunk? Well it ain't here,

it's over there. So dump this,

we'll go grab that chunk, and now we've got this.

So even traversing through it is a little slower because as I go

across the chunk barrier,

it takes me time.

Well, in Project 1, you're going to use it because you can use

the same container

and decide whether you want it to be a queue or a stack.

You take the same deck,

and you always push things in the back,

and then if I'm in stack mode,

I read from the back. But if I'm in queue mode,

I read from the front.

And I don't have to write two big old functions.

So, well, this is the stack function.

And every single, like,

98% of those letters are exactly the same as the letters in the

queue function.

Right?

I don't need to do that.

So we can use something like this.

Another thing that, when I run out of memory here, we saw that

we've got these chunks.

We know what happens in a vector.

We go get twice as much memory,

copy all that stuff over there, and use it.

In a deck, I don't need to. When I run out of memory,

I get a new chunk.

The old chunks stay exactly where they are.

So there's some different behavior in the way that they

manage memory and time.

It can be, yes. It can be in terms of like the

same sort of thing because I wouldn't want to have a map that

keeps going through memory like this either, right?

Just like anything.

So,

yep.

is it creating the largest size?

Is that like memory,

or is it a line?

Well, the chunks require a map, so I've got to have a little bit

more overhead memory-wise to keep track of all of them and to

navigate them. And like I said, because they're

in different locations in memory,

reading them also takes me a little bit more time.

So,

decks are slower and less good on memory than vectors.

That's another good reason why you don't use them for

everything. They do have some pre solid uses

though, and you should definitely use one for your

treasure hunt search container All right, you get it out of

deck the file include that and then that's the wrap on this one

So we'll be back here on Thursday getting it

If you've got those skills,

if you've got objects,

if you can do that,

then yes, that's great.

Not everybody is a master of that,

but also at

some point though too, if you've got

Where your object in a dash?

If it's got a Square where that outfit goes it's going to want

to write the next object in there

Move it out. It should be at the same

location

Yes,

we're going to set something up here, look for an e-mail, we're

going to get it out here the next day or so, we'll go to that

and then talk to you, that's the other one.

Yep,

correct, yep. I'm wondering if you can talk a

little bit off topic,

but is the school you have access to, like the Apple

developer program for students?

Ooh, what does that do?

Like Apple wants me to like pay,

they didn't even test my app on my devices,

and you have to like do code signing and stuff.

I'm wondering if you can talk about that.

I don't know of one, But are you using test flight at all, or not

using test flight? I am using,

like,

without using test flight.

Okay,

so test flight, I don't know what test flight costs you, but

that does allow you to get paid as up and running on device,

right?

So look into that, and then I'll see if I can figure out if we

got any places to come in. Okay,

thanks.

I'm trying to understand why we have that shift,

and why even this is the first place where we have these

different chunks.

Right, so in this one you see how I'm like, when I push front,

I don't want to have to push things out of the way to push

front. That's why the front chunk fills

from back to front. Where it's like, here I push,

push, push, push. On that one,

I push front, it just writes in front of data 0,

and that's the new square bracket 0.

See what I mean?

And so that's why it slides that way.

And that shift tells me how many are open.

In this case, the shift factor is 2, because there's two unused

at the beginning of that chunk.

Here,

it's 3.

But the shift,

you can kind of come up but the equation is to pull off the

whole how do I do square brackets.