I'm just going

to

put it in the fridge.

I had a question about the hardware and how it,

how it get rich and increased,

I'm really happy for this.

That's a system call?

I'm not exactly sure how that happens.

System call. It's a UNIX system combo program

called a JL machine.

It runs your program under it, so then

it's going to basically be a supervisory control so it can

see what's going on in terms of your allocation costs.

So as far as the memory requirement on text,

is it in raw bytes?

Or is it might be preferable to, you know,

for somebody to keep a keyband stack? It's gonna get both of

them.

Okay, so it's just looking at like some of keyband stack.

Yeah, there's no place to sort of put it to save it to.

Okay, I was thinking,

okay,

you know if I'm like running out of stack space, It's deep.

It's big.

Yeah, it's great.

Use the heat.

How are you running on a sex face?

Well, it's just thinking if that was something coming up.

You know, it's thinking maybe just allocate all the big

objects on the heat. On the heat, which is always a

good idea anyway.

But as far as the autograder is concerned, it's just taking some

time.

Yeah.

Okay,

let's see

what

we've

got here.

I'm going to put it in the fridge for a little while.

I'm going to put it in the fridge for a little while.

I'm going to put it in the fridge for a little while.

I'm going to put it in the fridge for a little while.

I'm going to put it in the fridge for a little while.

I'm going to put it in the fridge for a little while.

I'm going to put it in the fridge for a little while.

I'm going to put it in the fridge for a little while.

I'm going to put it in the fridge for a little while.

I'm going to put it in the fridge for a little while.

I'm going to put it in the fridge for a little while.

I'm going to put it in the fridge for a little while.

I'm going to put it in the fridge for a little while.

I'm going to put it in the fridge for a little while.

All right,

let's go.

So we talked about functors,

which I said is a combination of some words that we can sort of

look at these things at when we're talking about it.

So you'll hear people call them function objects.

A short version of that is a functor,

and then there's a couple of specific types of function

objects that we use. One called a predicate,

which is also short for a unary predicate,

which is a function object that is expecting to take one

argument,

unary,

and then return true or false based on some criteria in that

function.

A comparator is another version of a functor, which is just

another nickname for a binary predicate function object.

And in the binary predicate function object, it's going to

take two parameters and give you a true or false.

with the thought being that those two things will be

compared.

And then, additionally,

in the binary predicate

slash comparator tradition,

the way that that works is, is expected to work by the STL, I

should say. The way that it works is, it's

expecting that if the first item is less than the second item,

the comparator should return true.

it wants things to behave like less so we

saw this one here and this looks like a proper comparator and

it's returning true when the left employees name would show

up earlier in the dictionary than the right employees name

that's what this functor does so this will be a great functor for

sorting your employees by name in ascending order,

and this less than is going to be key to look for there.

That less than is kind of shaped like the direction of growth,

right? So if I've got the less than like this, I can think of

smaller things over here to the left at the beginning and bigger

things over there at the right. So that's another way to

remember it.

The choice of whether or not less makes things sort

increasing or decreasing is 100% arbitrary.

It was chosen at the design time of the FTL,

though,

and then everything else responds with that in mind.

Do you call the string less than the puncture, I guess you'd call

it, I don't know.

Do you just need the less than symbol?

To compare two strings?

Yes. Yes,

strings,

the C++ string object has operator less than overloaded

for two strings.

So that's why it works.

Yeah,

without that, the less than wouldn't work for a string.

It's just a class. It's just another object.

But the string library has it overloaded, and that's why it

works.

All right, so you see down at the bottom here, it's used to

sort this range of employees from beginning to end.

And then every time the sort algorithm says, because I'm

trying to put these in order,

which one of these two should go first?

It ships it off to that thing and it says, well this one's

less,

okay, well this one goes earlier,

and that one goes later.

And that's how these algorithms work.

And so you can see here when an object has,

when a class,

sorry I shouldn't say object or class,

when a type has a proper response to standard

less

or has overloaded the operator less than, And we don't need a

third parameter.

If you look at that struct up there,

I guess we don't even have a copy of the employee struct.

But whatever is in the employee struct, it's an object.

And there isn't a certain way that the compiler knows that

these things should be sorted. So if I just called sort with

just employee begin and end,

it wouldn't know how to compare those things.

It would get to a point where it was trying to do a less than on

one employee to another. and it wouldn't be an overloaded

operator,

less than,

so it would then just do it by memory address, which probably

wouldn't get you what you wanted.

Why is struct instead of a class?

It just has to be an object if you're gonna go with the func

door.

This could be a function pointer, as someone asked me,

this could just be a function, I could pass that in there as the

third parameter as well. But the typical use of a struct

here is because I don't have any private members.

I'm not trying to protect anything.

I have full access to everything in there.

The easiest way to make an object here is like that.

If I were to make this out of a class, I'd have to have another

line of code that would say, make sure that this is public.

Not to say that we won't make some comparators out of classes,

but this one is simple enough to just require a,

it just doesn't require,

but simple enough to just be easily done with a struct.

Yeah.

Does the function object require arguments when you're passing it

into sort?

Okay, so that's a good one. So right here you're talking

about?

So this is not the actual function,

right? If we look at this,

it says sort by name, which is the type.

So when I take a type and put parentheses after it, it's going

to call the default constructor of that type, and that's what

gives me the object.

Now,

the function that gets called by sort

is going to be a two-parameter function that takes left and

right.

And so that function is always going to be passed to those two

arguments by sort. You can't change that.

You can't make sort pass it another argument.

Well, I want to have these two things and sort of the third

parameter or fourth parameter. If you want another parameter in

there, you've got to do more work.

And that's what we're going to look at in a minute.

But this parentheses set right here isn't calling that

function.

This parentheses set is creating one of those objects.

And you see here in this priority queue declaration,

because the priority queue declaration is about building

this template I say type employee

container type vector of employee followed

by comparator type so sort by name is a type here and that's

how it should be you can't put objects inside template

declarations any more than you can put types inside function

calls so this makes an object this stays as type

for when the object gets created,

it instantiates its own, when this EPQ gets instantiated, it

creates its own version of this.

If you're ever going to store a priority queue with an employee

and a vector of employee,

will there ever be a vector of something else?

No,

yeah.

So why put it there, right?

If I wanted to store them in something else.

So I could say, I want a priority queue of employees

stored in a deck of employees.

Use this type.

So this is always going to be the same as that.

This is the type,

and this is the things in the type.

But this could be a different container.

I could have my own container that I want,

if I wanted to.

Yeah.

It's the way that the STL convention goes,

just like if we were to say, I would like to make a stack of

integers based on a vector of integers.

I would say stack int vector int,

right? Or I could say stack int deck int.

I wouldn't have to, because a stack is by default over a deck.

But this second parameter, if there's the ability to bring

your own container,

is always that container.

And that's why it seems at odds that all we really want to do

most of the time is change the comparator, but I still have to

say type container type, this to get the third one out there

would be nicer if this was second because I'm much more

likely to change my comparator than I am to change my

underlying type but the convention the STL says type

container then other stuff all right all right

let's get a little bit more complex with this defunct or

here we're gonna see look

at this one right in lines 1 through 10 I've got a class now

this is an object classes give me objects and you see this one

is called sort by coordinate it does have a private member which

is just a reference to a vector of doubles so it doesn't have

the vector itself, it's just got a reference to them.

And in order to fill that, we're gonna have to put that into some

sort of constructor, which is what you see there in line 5.

It says, sort by co-ord can be created with a custom

constructor up there as long as you pass in a reference to a

vector,

a constant reference to a vector of doubles.

Then it assigns that incoming Z into coords.

Now you see the function that sort or

whoever wants to call this

funcdoor is going to use is just that overloaded operator

parentheses in line seven right and this is a unary this is a

binary predicate it takes in i and j so it returns true so this

is some sort of comparator but you can see inside the body of

the comparator it says return what's in the coords at i is

that less than what's in coords at j.

So this one doesn't compare i to j.

It has some third-party information.

But the sort function is only ever gonna pass you two things.

The only place that I can get this third-party information is

if I give myself some member variable there and then

initialize it and use it afterwards.

You see how it works?

Yeah, go for it. So how would you define a

priority to look like a decent,

something like so-and-so coordinates?

Ah,

that would be more complicated.

In that one, you would have to have,

and you'll see that when you do the part 2B stuff.

When you've got a,

at the instantiation time, you've got a chance to bring

your own

Compared or object, you say,

here's my templated type, but the actual object I'm bringing,

so you would have to instantiate the object yourself and pass it

to the priority queue at construction time, so then it

would be able to use it.

That's a little opaque,

don't worry too much about it.

We won't have to do it this semester, but.

So what does this one do,

right? This one allows me to look in coords and compare

things inside of coords as

Opposed to I and J. So this leads to this thing

that's in the title slide. It's called indexed sorting So

rather than sort the data Itself,

I'm gonna sort the indexes of the data, right? So You can see

in this lower part here. I've got a vector of size T's

those are my indexes I got ten of those and then I've got a

vector of doubles these are my x-coordinates I've got ten of

those in this for loop what do I do I go in and set all of the

indexes equal to just what they should be like zero one two

three four five nine so that's what's an index and then in the

next step in line sixteen I generate some random number

mod it by a thousand and then multiply that by 10.

So rand in that situation gives me an integer I turned it into

some integer from 0 to 999

divide by 10 and I get some double that looks like a number

between 0 and 100

with a single tenth

Does that make sense?

So they're randomly ordered inside of X cord.

It's a bunch of randomly ordered doubles

But what I'm going to do is sort them

remotely.

So I'm not going to change the order of them.

So they might be ordered like this,

like 1.7,

0.5,

3.4,

10.9,

8.7. So that's what my doubles might

look like in some random execution,

right?

So now, if I were to look at those and say,

which one of those is the smallest one,

you can see it right there.

It's at 0.5.

So my index sort might look like one,

zero,

well, my index sort would look like two,

four,

three.

So, if I traverse these indices,

and then indirectly go look up in the data,

then I will get them in order. So the first thing I get is 1.

Okay,

1 isn't the thing I'm looking for.

Let's go into XChord at 1, and that's where I get the smallest

item.

The next thing I'm looking for is 0, but it's not the value 0,

it's at index 0 in the data, so the second thing I get is 1.7.

The third thing I get is index 2, which is 3.4.

The fourth thing I get is index 4 which is 8.7

and the fifth thing I get is index 3 at back at 10.9

Do you see what that is?

So now I've got the data in the original order I still haven't

moved them at all, but I have taken this vector of indices and

reordered them

So if I want to traverse these things in Increasing order I can

just go through the indexes and do an indirect lookup because

it's not directly to the thing I've got to say,

well, this is the index.

Go find it.

Does this make sense?

This is going to be very useful to you in project 2A.

You're going to have to have these zombies where you've got

some container that has all of them,

and they need to be in the order that they got created.

But you also need to see them in some statistical order.

So let me see if I can reorder them.

I've got some other way to do that, and I actually don't even

have to move the zombies themselves.

I just change the indices that refer to them.

It's an indirect sort.

Does that make sense?

Yeah?

How did you determine which indices you bought and which

were the rate?

When I wrote 102.43,

I just did it by eye,

right?

I eyeballed it, but how would I do it in code? I would call this

sort right here. You see I called sort from begin

to end on the indexes

So if I just did begin to end on the indexes with no third

parameter It'd just be like okay zero one two three four five six

seventy nine. They're sorted enjoy

Right,

but I've added this third parameter that says Use this SBX

variable

So here's where I'm bringing my own

instantiated comparison object, right?

Well, SBX is just this thing that I declared here in line 19.

It's one of these types.

I use the custom constructor to say,

here's a reference to those data right there.

Use that when somebody says,

here's I and J.

Okay, well don't compare zero and one.

Compare what's at zero and what's at one, and then give me

the answer.

So, when I call sort here from begin to end of index, it

reorders the integers based on the doubles values

without reordering the doubles.

Yeah.

It would be about as addition and sorting a container of

pointers to a specific level.

Sure, I mean, because the pointers are just a level of

indirection,

right?

So yes.

Yep.

Does this make sense? we're calling sort not on the data

we're calling sort on the indexes hence the term index

sorting I'm reorganizing indexes I'm not reorganizing data so

this is what you would do when what happens well I really want

them in the initial order for something but I also need them

in another order or

maybe I need them in four different orders and I don't

need three copies of them in memory so I'll keep one in the

original or the one I use the the order that's most important

I keep them in that order and then the other orders that I use

alternatively I'll make some index sorts on them and I can

use them when I need them

it's that was my second thing right

the second reason why I might want to index sort these things

is what if they're really large things in memory and I don't

want to do a whole bunch of swapping and moving things in

memory it might be a lot faster to just take some indices and

swap those around,

right? And then the third reason why I might do this is what if I

don't own the original list?

What if I can't sort the list?

Somebody said, here's a const reference to my data.

You can look at it.

Well, I want it in a different order.

Well, that's fine, but I'm keeping it in my order and it's

mine.

Okay, well then I'll just build an index sort and I can hustle

through my indexes to get the things in the order that I want.

So a few different reasons why you might do an indirect sort.

You can't do it yourself,

you want it in multiple orders,

it's too expensive to move things around,

it's a great way to do it.

So,

this is a technique, index sorting, that you'll be using,

plus it's also us looking at writing functor's comparators,

right? So,

we see this one as a binary predicate,

line 7,

takes two things and returns a bool.

That const here,

what does this const say?

That const says, when I call the function,

parentheses,

on this object, nothing in this object will change.

Meaning I'm not gonna change this,

and that's gonna be important, because if I didn't say const,

it might say, well, you only have a const reference to those

chords, and if I let you go, you could do something to them.

And so,

that's why that const has to be there,

otherwise it won't compile.

All right,

we're good?

Yeah.

So, the way that the predicate checks the condition,

the left-hand side is less than, so the left-hand side will go

after the right-hand side and go to the same sort.

So, that's a good question there.

It's covering me up here. Going back to what I said here.

When the predicate behaves like less than, the things that it's

sorting will be in increasing order.

So what's in coords at that location will be in increasing

order. As my i's and j's go up,

the things in the indirected version will be in increasing

order.

So if I had to use the less than there,

then it would have given me those things maybe in reverse

order.

So with a less than,

sorry, a greater than would've made things look like,

let's go with three,

four,

two,

zero,

one.

Would've looked like that.

Right,

and that would've been my indexes,

and now I can do this in reverse order.

So if I look at,

the largest thing would be at zero there, and that's the index

three, I go to the index three, I get 10.9.

Alright,

in that little piece of code you saw we filled this thing with

integers.

If I was going to do that all by itself, there's actually a

function in the SCL that just does that.

It's called iota.

So we'll also use that to describe a container full of

variables as well to do iota that.

Whether or not you used iota to do it, if I say did you iota

that, does that mean that you have zero, one, two, three,

four, five, six, seven

in it, because the iota function is a cross-language thing that's

been there for years and years.

But you see here, you just give it a place to start, a place to

end, and something to start at. So usually you start at zero.

But if you wanted to say, I wanna go from one to 100, you

just pass in one there, and it sticks in one, two, three, four,

five, six, seven, eight, nine throughout the range.

So if you have to fill it, this is a faster way to do it than

this way. But since I already had a loop

going, everything, I chose to stick it all in the loop.

All right?

Yeah?

Execution faster, yep,

yep.

Complexity wise, nope, it's still linear, right?

So can't do better than filling everything.

You,

yeah,

go.

The zero says that's where we start.

Right, because I can start at one if I want to go from 1 to 10

in this particular instance. If I wanted to go from 20 to 29,

I just put a 20 there or whatever,

whatever it is. It gives you a little bit of

control.

What if you're just like,

your, why the coordinates has to be constantly remembered?

The coordinates,

this doesn't have to be constant, but it is passed in as

constant, right?

It's declared at constant time, which is making good sense.

I mean,

I'm building this object to compare things, which means I

don't expect to be changing anything.

So I say, give me a const reference to that vector, but

then if I've got a non-const function that somebody's gonna

want to call on there,

compiler's gonna complain because you've got const data

and somebody's calling this with a non-const function, you might

be doing things that you don't want.

So that's why it's important to have that const

in the line, that one.

That one says,

when you call this operator parenthesis, we won't be

modifying this,

the this object.

All right,

now let's get to lambdas.

Lambdas are just anonymous functions.

Lambdas are great,

especially when you use the STL.

They can really clean things up quickly instead of having to go

somewhere.

So we saw in this previous version,

I had this class,

sort by chord, I had to define that somewhere else.

So when I'm using the sort function down here,

I say, if I look at somebody else's code and see this SBX,

I say, oh yeah, that's a sort by court, I wonder what that does.

Now I gotta go find it.

It's somewhere else in the code base, in the H file or a CBB

file, or something.

I'm strolling to go get to it. Okay, there it is.

Great.

Lambdas say, well what if you could just declare and define a

function right there? So,

lambdas allow me to do that. They give me anonymous functions

that work just like regular functions.

It can improve your code readability just because I can

define a function in line

and then use it.

So, I don't have to go back and find where the stuff is.

A lot of STL,

people that use STL algorithms really well will use lambdas

because it keeps their code close and quick and easy to use.

and you can also use them as actual function objects for

callbacks and whatnot.

So here's how the Lambda syntax works.

We've got square brackets

with a list of captures inside. We'll talk about that in a

minute.

Then we've got a parameter list, and you can think about this

just like any other function.

And then inside some curly braces,

we've got the function body itself.

So we get to use all the separators in this one syntax.

see this one down here at the bottom right so like I said

we'll talk about the captures list in a minute but I can say

here in my parameter list this is gonna take two integers n1

and n2 and then here in the body of the function it's gonna see

if these two things are five apart really that's what this

one does it's gonna return true if it is false otherwise so this

one you You see that we didn't say what the return type was

in this function, when normally we would have to.

But the compiler knows what you're doing,

right?

The compiler says, well, you just return the result of a

comparison.

That's going to be a bool.

So this would be a function that takes two integers and returns a

Boolean.

But that's all I need to define it.

So you can put something like that inside of a call to sort.

You'd have sort,

first part of the range,

second part of the range, and then a lambda.

It would use that to differentiate between them.

So here you see somebody wanted to be very explicit about the

return type.

So this is some alternate syntax.

If you want to make sure that a return type is specified,

because it might be different here.

Here you see the incoming values are doubles,

x and y,

so if I just said return x, y, the compiler would give me back

a double.

Great.

Unless I really want ints, in which case you'll see this

version says take those two doubles, add them together,

and then return the value as an int.

So if you need to control that,

you can.

And here's a lambda in practice.

Lines one through five,

nice little predicate.

Is odd,

pred.

If the number I get is odd, it returns true.

If it's not, it returns false.

Can you define a lambda outside of a function and find it for

sure,

just like so?

Yeah, just like in a line, yeah, you can't, I don't think you can

define a lambda outside of a function.

At least I've never tried that.

I know you can define it inside a function and then use it

inside of something. You can also just set it equal

to a variable, if you like, because I've got a variable

equal to this lambda, then you can call that.

So I mean,

the thing is a lambda is an anonymous function, but you can

still assign it to a name if you want.

All right. So there's this isOdd predicate.

It takes the value as an integer and returns true or false if the

thing is odd.

Really basic.

So you can go through this line of integers here in this vector,

and what does it do? It says, give me an iterator,

auto it one is equal to the find if call from the STL.

The FindIf takes a range,

and it's going to go through that range one at a time, and

every time it gets one of those things, it's going to call the

predicate that it has

to tell you whether it found something or not.

So if I call FindIf, begin, vec,

end, vec,

with isOdd, pred there, what does it do? It looks at 24 and

says that's not odd, 32 not odd,

54, 86 not odd,

53 is odd, so that call returns me an iterator pointing at

53.

That's what this does.

All right?

You see that isOdd pred, remember, that's a type.

I need an object here, though, because it's a function object,

so I call the constructor to make one.

That's fine, that's stuff that we've already covered in this

lecture.

But now look at this stuff down in line 14, 15,

16. it does exactly the same thing

it says start up again a vector and

that end of vector but then when I want to call my predicate use

this this function object

and here I've got some function given to me by this lambda

so when I call

that findIf, it looks at each thing in between begin and end

and applies this to it. It says take that integer,

return if it's true or false, and then it works.

So you see how I don't have to go...

In this one,

obviously isOddPred is a pretty good name, so I know what's

going on there, but if I really wanted to see how it was done,

I'd have to go somewhere in the code and find isOddPred,

way back up there in line 1. Now,

this function right here,

I've got everything I need.

I see it right now.

That's what's gonna happen.

And I don't have to worry about building

a separate object to do it.

Performance change, no.

Yeah.

What is the square brackets? The square brackets is the capture.

Now,

the capture list is when I want to bring something from outside

of the function into the function.

We'll put it in a parameter.

Well, I can only put one parameter in here because find

if only sends you one thing. Here's the thing, is this what

I'm looking for?

What if I say,

I want to find everything that's greater than five,

and five isn't a number that I know at compile time, it's

actually just a number somebody gave me.

Say you give me a number, and I'll find the first thing bigger

than that

This function only takes one thing where do I get that bigger

than number I?

Can't I can't change that function, but The captures list

says anything that I put in here Will also be available

inside the body of the function

So if I say,

I want to return everything greater than something,

right?

So maybe I've got some entered. Let's modify this when we say,

I've got some int x,

and I'll say cn into x. That lets the user tell me what

they want. And then I'm going to go ahead

and put x in here in my captures list.

And now I can rewrite this to be like, hey, return n is greater

than x,

so this will find the first thing greater than the number

that the user put in there but you see that this function here

is only a single it's a it's a it's a unary predicate no matter

what that's what find if is going to do and if I want more

information in there I have to put it in this captures list it

takes stuff from the outer scope and and injects it into the

inner scope of the lambda.

Does that make sense?

So, in the previous one, now think about how we did

sort by chord.

I had to declare that object, I had to write a constructor,

I had to have a private member variable.

I could write a really simple lambda to do exactly what that

one did,

but I needed access to those chords,

right? I could be like int i,

comma, int j.

And if I put chords in here,

then chords would be available right there.

And I could do that without having to rewrite this, right?

So I'm talking about something like,

and you still want to do this by reference.

So I'm going to say like ampersand xchord.

and then I've got some int i int

j

and my curly brace here just says return

x cord at i is less than

x cord at j.

Curly brace. And I'm done.

Right,

so that's how the lambda keeps it all in line there.

Because the only thing that's gonna get passed to the body of

the function

is the stuff that the function wants.

But if I want something else inside that function, I can

inject it by putting it in the captures list.

We get it?

In this,

the first version?

Or which one?

Well,

in this first version, before I started scribbling things,

all I needed was the value to be passed in to make my decision.

If I need some external information,

more than just the thing,

or things, depending on what kind of function it is,

if I need more information, that's where the captures list

brings it in.

It has to be there. It's part of this index.

Yes, that means I'm passing X cord in by reference.

I don't need to be I don't need to be copying it cuz they'll

copy it if I do if I don't if I don't right

yep and since X is an int I'm perfectly fine with that yeah

to export, send in as a third parameter.

How do you get that algorithm to send in your special third

parameter?

What if you want four parameters or six parameters? How do you

get sort,

how do you get find if to know,

oh, I need these three extra parameters.

Please pass them in with every time you call it on this one

number.

Not gonna do that for you.

You see what I mean?

Yeah, so I guess I'm kind of confused how it would determine

what the other characters were like.

So I guess if we have one,

okay, it's gonna,

it's gonna set that record and you start adding like j.

Right, it depends on the function that's,

yeah, it's the function that you're using.

So when you look up the documentation on find if,

it says, I'm gonna pass one of these things at a time to that

predicate object.

If you look at the documentation on sort, it says, well, I'm

gonna need to compare two things in order to organize them, and

the first one's gonna be of this type, the second one's gonna be

of that type.

You know, something in the range and something in the range.

Okay,

so for the sort,

it's... Sort always calls it with two,

right.

Sort always calls two,

find if always calls with one.

Yeah.

And I can't do anything about that, that's what those

functions are written to do.

All right?

All right.

So this one is some more with capture on there.

you can see that the user has been able to enter some factor

here in line six.

And now, since we pass factor into the captures list,

the body can tell,

what if I divide n by factor?

This is an even multiple of the number that you passed in.

And some enterprising TA wrote this slide, So all of those

numbers are multiple of anything between one and 25.

So you will always find one of those numbers in this one.

It's kind of slick.

But you see here that it's using find if, which goes through this

range,

passes those things one at a time into this function.

In this case, it happens to be a function object created by a

lambda.

We need this factor so that we can do some external information

on this. We return n divided by, the

remainder of n divided by that factor.

You could put like a bunch of variables in the capture.

You could put a bunch of stuff in the capture.

It would just want to access everything.

Right,

there we go.

Right,

so this is getting way deep in the weeds.

We don't have to know or use lambdas, so I don't want to

stick on it too much, but you see if I put nothing in the

square brackets, you get nothing.

If I put equals in there,

it takes everything from the surrounding scope and does it by

value.

If I put ampersand in there, it takes everything from the

surrounding scope and puts it in there by reference.

If I name a particular variable,

like foo there, that was the only one captured,

and it's by value,

ampersand foo captures only foo by reference.

If I want to carry multiple variables, foo comma bar lets me

get more than one in there. If I want to do one in

particular,

like I want foo as a container, I want to pass that definitely

by reference.

The rest of the stuff I want to have equal access to, I have

access to all of them. I can make copies in there just

as well. So you can do that and do that

sort of stuff. If you're in an object,

you can pass in this.

So we've got now access to all the member variables of this

object.

So, yeah. Yeah.

How does const work on this one?

I wouldn't mess around with the const on it.

Yeah, I'd have to mess around with const on it.

I'm not sure.

So,

the assignment operator passing in the items by

value,

that is calling

It's making a full copy of the thing that you have.

So if it's a type with a constructor it would call that

for sure, yeah.

With a copy constructor, right, yeah.

Exactly,

so the question is,

this is there and it points us to the fact that even if I

declare a lambda inside of a class, it doesn't have access to

the rest of the class members,

unless I include this in the capture.

So when you do passing in everything by value, does the

compiler only copy things that you actually use or does it copy

everything?

That's a great question,

and one I don't actually have the access to.

But from the description here, it says it captures all the

variables in the surrounding scope by value.

That's putting them in there, right? They've got to be in that

scope. So you can imagine that this is

a function.

So it does have a stack frame.

If you say, I'm going to take everything from the surrounding

scope and put it in there by value,

there's room for every single one of those things as a copy of

every one in there. And so that's really how it's

going to go off in there.

I was wondering the difference between

this and the ampersand, Uh-huh. I'm guessing,

like,

if we did this on a lambda inside of a class, it would

capture the whole class, whereas ampersand would only capture the

things that were like- In that function.

In that function. In that function that you're in,

right? In that member function.

Yep.

All right, like I said, not a whole lot we gotta do with

lambdas,

but they're a thing.

If you wanna use them,

they're kinda cool.

You can help yourself out a little bit.

So,

this one,

it's just an example. Like I said, we gotta move off

of these.

It's just some more examples of using lambdas.

Here you see this lambda in line three

and another lambda in line nine.

The one in three is a binary,

it's a unary predicate or just a predicate.

We call them predicates for short.

And then the one in nine is a comparator.

This one looks like the time on the left hand message is at less

than the time on the right hand message.

So this is gonna be sorted in increasing order if I use this

in a sort,

right? And it is used in a sort here,

if I use it in a priority queue,

and stuff like that.

All right.

All right,

awful functors and landers,

on to the STL, this question, why does so much of this stuff

on top-coder still get used in C++, even though you've got the

chance to do it in Java, you can do it in C++, you can do it in

Python.

The STL is so awesome,

that people that are really the nerd geeky coders,

they just learn the STL and then they use it, because it's really

nice,

so that's why.

Learning the STL,

how do we do this?

There's a bunch of online tutorials and examples.

Obviously, there's C++.com,

CppReference.com.

Practice with small programs. There's detailed coverage in

books.

There's a PDF that's on Canvas under files, resources,

algolist.pdf. It's a nice little one-pager.

I found some other course was using it somewhere.

I pirated it.

And it's just a one page to just sort of skim what's going on

inside of algorithm.

So you can look at that. And that's a good way to learn

how to use the STL

is skim sections of it.

Because you don't need to know everything in the STL.

And no one here is probably going to be able to steel trap

the memory thing to remember

everything in the STL.

You just need to know what's there.

And you think, well, I know there's something like this over

there. then you go look that up.

And if it's something that's used on a regular basis, then

you'll obviously remember it and you won't have to look it up.

But it's just like going to the grocery store.

You can't tell me exactly

where this brand's can of beans is.

But if it's a grocery store you go to,

you know the aisle where the vegetables and cans are there.

You just kind of go to it and then you do the linear search

and you come up with a can of beans.

But it's way faster than looking through the entire store because

you know nothing. So the same thing is true when

you're trying to learn a library.

You don't have to learn everything.

You don't have to know where every book in a real library is,

but you know,

well, this is the reference section over here.

Here's the kids' books on this floor.

They're sort of organizing this A to B to C to Z order.

And so when I want to find something, I have to know that

it exists.

And then I go get the particulars on it.

So Algolist is a good practice for that.

You can look at the names of each of the functions in the

algorithm and like a one-liner about what that function does.

If you can remember even half of that

and just have a feeling for the other half,

next time you've got something to do, you're like, oh,

I know there's an STL function for that.

You go look it up, well, yep, there's the range, and then I

have to bring this type of comparator predicate with it,

and this is gonna work.

So this is what you have to do when you learn a library.

It's nearly impossible to remember it all, so you just

skim through the documentation, study something that's

interesting,

learn how to use those pieces, and come back when it's

necessary.

You know, it's familiarity and look up skill versus being able

to memorize the whole thing.

The STL is gonna give you errors.

We call these induced errors. Typically this is when your code

is causing the problem in the STL.

The problem is never in the STL. The problem is always you.

Just remember that.

So you're going to have to sift through a bunch of lines of

messages.

Typically, if it crashes in the STL, it might be three or four

calls deep in the STL.

So you look at the top call,

and you work your way down until it's the first call in some of

the code you wrote.

That's where the problem was.

That's how you do it.

Here, we say 90% of STL-related crashes are due to users

dangling pointers or references going out of scope.

I have no idea how you might be able to verify that statistic,

but once again, it doesn't seem wrong.

So, I don't know if it's truly accurate,

but the feeling is there.

It's almost always you losing something.

Out of scope,

pointers that don't go where they're supposed to go,

you can do that.

Randomization,

this is a random library to support random number

generation.

This one might be good for writing test files.

You could write a little random number generator and I told

people over and over again in office hours on P1, just write a

random number generator and make your own 15 by 15 map.

At 20% of the time their water and 40% of the time their land

or whatever percents you want, just generate a map.

You can do the same thing with,

in P2, we're actually doing the same thing.

We've got a random number generator that helps you

randomly generate zombies.

So learning how to use this random library is a pretty good

way to do some testing because we know that writing our own

tests isn't always the easiest thing to do.

And when I can't think of anything that I would do wrong

and then you fail half the autograder, I was like,

I couldn't think of anything but obviously there's a whole bunch

of things out there that I couldn't think of.

The random number generator is how we got them in the first

place. We got these gigantic, randomly

generated tests.

Well, it's a really strong way to test your code in general,

learn how to use randomization there.

This one is just a simple example

of using a random number generator.

It uses this thing right here called an MT-19-9-37.

Right, that's a specific algorithm

for a random generator known as a Mersenne Twister.

So this Mersenne Twister is a very highly researched and

appreciated algorithm so it's actually implemented here and

the cool part about this one is as we talked about the STL being

a specification you can do whatever you want on your side

but it turns out if you in your library implemented

MT-19-937 then it has to be exactly the same as somebody

else's because it is a particular specification so the

MT-19-937 is a way of randomizing things.

What do we do in line 14?

We use an iota.

Give me zero, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven.

Blah, blah, blah.

Then shuffle them.

And the shuffle starts from begin to end and uses this

Mersenne twister right there as the thing to move things around.

So say, how do I know to use that empty object?

In the documentation of shuffle,

it'll tell you what this third parameter type has to be.

In this case, that MT937 with the random device created there.

That's how it goes. And so,

you can see this. This will just run through a

bunch of values,

kick out random numbers.

This version of it is doing something similar here,

right? It generates a random number and then mods it by 21,

subtracts 10. so now I've got something

between negative 10 and positive 10.

It's a random device,

like,

does that give you a random seed?

Yeah, it's a whole thing. So the question is, does a

random device give you a random seed?

In this case, if I run this code over and over again, no, I

haven't seeded it.

You see that random device is created with no parameter.

If you wanted to seed that random device, you'd have to put

the seed in the constructor,

and then you would be able to get a different chain.

So if I ran this 15 times, it'd give me the same thing every one

of those 15 times.

So if you know about random numbers,

they're not really random.

Computers can't do random things.

They're computers.

But they can do pseudo-random things.

So really,

you look like PRNG,

you'll see that.

There's a pseudo-random number generator.

A lot of games use PRNGs.

I had somebody on a game talk about PRNGs-es

because it was like we were waiting for stuff to come out

and you know what you're gonna get every day and so I was like

PRN Jesus grants you the thing that you wanted like oh no it's

another common common common when am I gonna get a rare when

I get an epic PRN Jesus just doesn't love me so that's the

pseudo random number generator and

that's what MT 99 37 is is a pseudo random number

generator and in order for the computer to work on that,

you have to seed the random number generator.

So as you seed the random number generator,

that means that it will always generate that exact same

pseudo-random sequence.

So if I seed it with five and then run 1,500 numbers,

and then seed it with five and run 1,500 numbers, they will be

exactly the same.

To a human, they'll look totally random, but they are a

progression, they will be exactly the same.

If I seed it with six and get 1,500 numbers, they'll be

totally different from the 5 seed.

So that's how the pseudorandom number generator in P2 works, is

we give you a seed and then your zombie generator generates

exactly the same zombies that we generate on the autograder.

That's how that works.

All right,

using the STL container performance, this is just a

quick one looking at some empirical testing here.

This is relative performance of some STL containers and you can

see here what's going on.

It's going to give me a task up at the top left there.

It says let's fill an empty container with different values.

That's all it does.

It tells me about what they've got there.

I've got a vector pre which uses resize before it does the

insertion.

And then here's the hardware it was done on back in the time

that it was done.

But you can see that as we insert 100,000 items, 200,000

items, 500,000 items,

a million items,

you can see that the list, they're all linear.

They look linear, right?

Fairly straight lines, a little bit of wiggle going on there,

but for the most part they're linear.

So,

bigger constant factor on the list,

lists are slower.

You see that decks are slower than vectors.

See that a vector is even slower than something that's pre-sized

because we don't have to do the hey I've run out of space let's

double and move to a new spot.

Yeah that's just this is just experimental data so the

question is why aren't these lines perfectly straight?

Well the bumps come from any number of factors and you take

large numbers and multiple tests like this to get a feeling for

this stuff because you're never gonna get anything that's

perfect right so next task fill the container with

numbers 0 to N then shuffle at random and then search for each

value using standard find once again

list as expected slower

deck as expected

slower deck is a bunch of List is a bunch of single-item

collections.

A vector is one big collection.

So it's faster to get this stuff done in there.

So, so far,

vector's pretty much ruling.

How about number three?

Fill the container, shuffle them at random,

pick a random position,

and then insert a thousand items.

Now, all of a sudden, who's fast now?

That linked list. Because inserting a thousand

items in the middle of a vector is much slower.

I have to move everything out of the way

So the list is much faster here It's almost constant time speed

is just whatever it takes to get that stuff done in the middle

You see the deck the deck is substantially faster than the

vector and why is that?

We know how the deck works it's a collection of chunks So I

figure out here's the spot where I want to insert some stuff I

can go make all new chunks and not have to move any of the

original stuff

so there's a lot less data movement in the Deck than there

is in the vector.

So the reason why vector isn't the end all be all can get beat

If I don't want to move my data around yeah, I got big chunks

So this one is, similar to the last one, find a spot,

then remove a thousand elements.

So as you might expect,

removing elements in a vector means moving all the rest of the

stuff. So that's going to be our

slowest up there.

And doing it in the list is just like,

hey,

pointer,

new pointer.

Done.

Right? And deck shows up in the middle there.

One of the cool things about a deck is,

as you insert things near the beginning, it's able to push the

stuff at the beginning farther forward,

or if you insert things near the end,

it pushes stuff in the end farther backwards.

The deck looks at where your insertion point is.

I don't know exactly what happens when it is in the

middle, but whenever it's on one half or the other,

it's always faster to move one half of the data,

like one quarter versus moving three quarters.

It'll move the smallest part.

This one is interesting. Inserting new values at the

front.

Vector, of course,

the worst.

We've got to move everything.

But then list and deck are so close to each other that you

can't even tell the difference between the red line and the

blue line.

That's because inserting at the beginning of a deck doesn't take

you any extra time, right?

It's just there.

You've got space, and we can put things in front of the deck

and just point to the new chunks and we're in good shape.

So, this is the kind of thing that you can look at and say,

what is the common behavior for my application? What am I going

to be doing with this container? Am I always going to be finding

stuff in the container?

Am I always going to be finding stuff and then inserting stuff

in the container? Am I going to be removing stuff regularly from

the container or just build it once and I keep everything that

I've ever had in there?

So,

you make decisions by knowing things like this.

All right,

end of slideshow,

discard,

onwards and upwards.

Heaps and heaps sort.

This is the Eiffel Tower built at a bookstore.

I'm having a whole lot of free time.

Trees,

we've done trees, right? You did trees in 280?

Let's go really fast on these trees then.

We know what a tree is,

a tree is just a graph.

And a graph is just a collection of nodes and vertices,

every tree is a graph,

but not every graph is a tree.

We think of a tree as a connected graph, so there's

nothing that's floating off to the side, and a connected graph

with no cycles, which can also be said a graph where any two

nodes are connected by some unique shortest path.

In a directed tree, the ones with the arrows like we see here

on the right,

we think of relationships by child and parent.

The parent child is at the sharp end here.

And the parent is at the dull end.

I don't know what that says about me as a parent,

but that's where I live.

All right, so this is what trees look like.

You know how it works.

In a binary tree,

a node has at most two children. It can have zero, it can have

one, but it can't have more than two.

So there we are,

breezing through trees.

Some more definitions here. We've got root,

which is the node that everything flows from in a

directed tree,

the one with no parent.

And then parent and child is this sharp and pointy end

relationship I described earlier,

but between two things that are directly connected.

In the ancestor relationship,

this is something that has to travel up the tree.

So you can see here the parent is an ancestor,

sure.

But so is the grandparent and the great-grandparent.

and so H has D,

B,

and A as ancestors.

Now, if you're thinking about how a family might work,

this could be me, this could be my dad, this could be my

grandfather,

this could be my aunt.

My aunt is definitely my elder,

but she's not my ancestor.

Because in order for me to get to her,

I've got to go up a level,

up a level, and then down a level.

So even though she's higher than me in the tree, that doesn't

make her my ancestor.

So the ancestor relationship has to be in a direct line.

Similarly, the descendant relationship

has to be straight down. So I can see that

my

grandfather's brother here

has a child,

definitely a cousin of mine, definitely older than me,

but I'm not a descendant of my grandfather's brother because

the only way to get from my grandfather's brother to me is

to go up and then down.

So if you have to change directions,

the ancestor and descendant thing gets broken.

But if we can go in only one direction, I can find

descendants or I can find ancestors.

Internal nodes are nodes that have children.

External nodes are all the rest.

We call external nodes leaf nodes because it makes fun out

of the tree paradigm.

Leaf nodes,

external nodes, the same thing. Every node is either internal or

external,

either internal or leaf.

Got it?

Good definitions.

You know these things.

How might we represent this in code?

Here's a nice little templated node.

So this is for connected memory version of a tree.

We make a connected version.

I got this struct node,

and it's templated so that the data that I stick in there in

line 5 is of type item, and it's named item, and then when I

compile it with different things, it holds different

things. So I can make a tree of doubles.

I can make a tree of zombies.

I can make a tree of stock orders or whatever you want.

Right? I see a node pointer to the right and a node pointer to

the left in lines three and four, and that's what gives me

my binary tree-connected version.

It's efficient for moving down the tree,

it's not so efficient for moving up the tree.

I wanna find the parent of myself, and I'm looking at

myself, the only way I can do it is if I don't have another

pointer,

is to just start at the root and keep going down the tree until I

find whoever's pointing to me, and that's how I get the parent.

Let's go over to the directed tree.

If you wanted to make it a directed tree, Can you give that

to a parent?

The question is, can I make this a non-directed tree by including

a parent?

No.

That just gives me access to the upper levels,

right?

So it's still directed in the sense that I'm thinking that

left and right are children and there's a direction to go

in terms of a non-directed tree you would probably represent it

differently,

yeah.

like more like a more like a graph because there isn't a root

we need to be able to get even because even in a even if I were

to include the parent pointer

I mean I'd set the parent pointer on the root to be an all

pointer but I would say where do I start on this tree oh I start

at the root okay everything flows down from the root so it

is still directed you see what I mean

All right,

so this is how I can do this in connected memory.

We know that trees are recursive structures.

Any subtree is just as much a tree as the original,

even if I'm just taking this node three here.

It's a tree. It's one node.

It's its own root.

I can do tree-like things even on a single node.

Here's how we measure some metrics for trees.

I've got this height property and I've got a depth property.

They sound similar and they are related.

They are not the same. The one in the middle, that's

the easiest one though.

Size, how many white circles are there?

Well, it's a recursive structure, so I've gotta define

this function recursively.

And the way I'm gonna do that is with a base case, of course,

because it's all about that base.

All about that base.

Gotta have the base case.

So if the tree is empty, I say the size is zero.

Great, got that part. then other than that, if the

tree isn't empty, I say that the size of some given node is one

for that node, plus the recursive call to the size of

its left child and the size of its right child.

That's how size gets defined recursively.

The other two, height,

I'm gonna measure height like I do in a real tree,

from down to up.

Right, so in my CS trees, that starts to my leaves and works to

my root.

So I go up.

Depth I measure like falling in the water,

here and I go down.

So depth is measured from the root down,

height is measured from the leaf's up.

And they're both also recursive definitions because it's still a

recursive data structure.

When I am at any leaf node,

my height is one.

If I've got an empty tree, my height is zero,

that's what it says up there.

But at any leaf node,

the height is one more than the height of

its two children,

right? And so in a leaf node,

there's zero over here, zero over there, I take the largest

of those and add one to it. So all my leaf nodes end up as

one. What about a that recursive

definition says the height of a is 1 plus the height of

B and C Who's ever larger? I can see B is a

height 3

C is of height 2 So to figure out a side I say max of 3 and 2

is 3 plus 1 4 on a

of the inverse depth equal to 2, there are two values.

Well, when we're in a binary tree, we can always,

we can always upper bound to the depth,

I mean the width,

right?

Because it's two times two times two times two, so we don't

really, I've never seen a problem that's metric width on

them,

but you could always give it an upper bound, right? Because I

know if I'm three levels deep,

then the widest I could be is four in a binary tree.

And something else that could be wider if it was a ternary or

some higher order.

So, yep.

And then the other one I have here is depth.

It starts up at the top as well. If I'm empty, I got zero.

But then the depth says,

the depth of any given node that's not in an empty tree is

the depth of its parent plus one.

Root having no parent, you can think of that as being zero.

So the depth of the parent,

the depth of the root, sorry,

is one.

Then the depth of B and C

are both 2,

the depth of D, E, I, and F are 3,

and then there's a 4 there at that next depth,

right?

On the other hand, if I'm measuring my heights,

right,

F, I,

E,

G, and H are all of height 1. They're leaf nodes, even though

they're not at the same depth.

So That's why I said height and depth aren't completely

interchangeable, but they are related.

We'll see that in just a second here.

So the height at D is the max of H and G plus 1.

The height at B is the max of D and E,

2,

plus 1.

This is a 2 there, and then we go there.

So you'll see there that the maximum height

And the maximum depth are going to be the same

Yeah

Similar right because

These like if you look at so in this in this row right here is

where the key is, right? So I've got all of those things are at a

depth of three

But the height of D and the height of E are not the same

So where does size come in?

Size is just how many there are, right? So in this particular

instance,

what is it, nine?

Yeah, there's nine circles there, right?

So size just says, well, for the root,

it's one plus however many over here plus however many over

there,

yeah.

And then C says, well, I'm just one plus how many over here and

how many over there.

This comes back, this is three,

this is five,

that's nine.

Alright, so that's how we do some metrics inside of trees

Lightning fast introduction to trees if trees have gone by too

fast one You should have seen them in 280 and two we will

definitely dig deep into trees

If you dig in the trees you dig around trees We'll dig around

some trees in the second half and we do all of our tree

algorithm stuff So don't worry about it.

We will go into trees in depth Oh man, there's too many.

All right, okay.

All right, how about heaps?

We have talked about heaps.

I've talked about you're going to use one.

So one of the three things that you have to write for project 2B

is a priority queue based on a binary heap.

So let's discuss what a heap is. It's a great song by Frank

Sinatra.

King of the Hill,

A number one.

Top of the heap, right?

The most important thing. That's really all it is.

So we think about stack memory and heap memory, and say, well,

how is heap memory related to a heap?

Turns out,

back in the 70s,

somebody wrote a stupid article in a magazine,

and said, well, we got the stack memory, and then we just got

this whole heap of memory over there,

meaning a lot. That's all they meant.

And that just turned into the name for that memory.

It's been called the heap ever since.

It has no relationship to a technical heap,

but that's the name of it. So it's a poorly chosen name,

but that's the name that everybody's gonna use from now

until the end of time.

An actual heap is something where the most important thing

is on the top.

And you know, if you were in a fighting situation,

the closer you get to the top,

the better off you're gonna be. So maybe you might not be at the

top, you might not be able to beat the top person,

but if you're right below them you're in pretty good shape,

right?

The farther down you get in the heap, the more people you have

standing on your head,

the worse off you are.

That's all. That's all a heap is.

A heap is a good way to do it. So first thing we're going to do

is look at this way to describe trees, because we're still

talking about trees and I need this to set me up.

So I've got this complete tree definition that says,

a complete tree says that every level,

except possibly the last, is completely filled.

And then if the bottom level is not filled,

I have to make sure that it's filled from left to right.

So you can see here at depth one,

two,

and three on this first tree, they're completely filled.

The only place where I have some gaps is down here at the bottom

level in depth four,

but depth four is filled from left to right.

I've got two items in the fourth level, and they're both children

of the farthest left item from the third level.

so this is a complete tree this one here in the middle is not

complete right because I've left the third depth and started

filling things of the fourth depth before it's full so not

complete right and then the last one here does have depths one

two and three filled but at depth four we have left a blank

spot it's a little less easy to see but there is no right child

of D before I started putting a left child on E.

So that's what complete looks like.

The tree with like all of its sort of else filled with all of

it.

Right, exactly.

So that's where it says,

every level except possibly last.

So if the last row is also completely filled,

it's still complete.

Yep.

All right.

So here's the cool thing about complete binary trees.

I've given these things numbers now.

We're going to start at one, which is something we never do.

We're going to do it now.

We start at one and say, let's say the root is one,

and its left child is two, its right child is three,

four, five, six, seven, and so on.

If I draw these out like this,

put some numbers on them,

and then stick them all into a container like this,

how does that work? Do you see the pattern?

Without looking at the picture, so I'll call this the logical

version of the tree,

and I'll call this the physical version of the tree, because I'm

going to store it physically like this,

although logically this is what I mean.

So what is the child of D? You

look to the logical version and you see it.

Where is the logical,

where is the child of D here?

Eight,

right?

That's the left child.

How do I get to the right child of D?

Nine.

Is there some math in there that you want to bring to me? Yeah.

Is it two times b to the left, and two times b plus one to the

right?

Exactly.

So,

now I can build a tree knowing that

any node I get,

if I wanna know what its left child is

I multiply its index by two, and I'm there,

if I haven't gone off the tree.

Multiply by two and add one, I've got its right child.

Any node I have, if I divide its index by two,

I'm at the parent.

If you start at zero, then it gets a little clunkier, right?

But if you start at one, then it's just I times two for left,

I times two plus one for right.

So you'll have the chance to decide how you want to do that

when you implement your heap. you can do it physically or you

can do it logically so when you do yours you could say well I'm

actually gonna have this thing be size plus one I'm never gonna

stick anything in zero so then I really will just look from one

to nine and my math will be easy or you could stick it in from

zero to eight

and do the offset math and it would still work so

why does it work

just because of the way that the binary tree grows,

right?

It grows, so you say,

well,

here's where A is my root,

and then its two children take up the next two spots,

and then B's child take up the next two spots,

and then C's children take up the next two spots,

and B's first child was here,

and then its two children just have to go after the last place

we put things, and it just works.

I mean you could have,

if you wanted,

you could put a ternary tree in memory like this as well.

You could have a tree that had 10 children at every level as

long as it was complete,

then you would know that you're not missing anything

all

right so when we have a

complete binary tree it turns out that I can represent it in

contiguous memory not connected memory anymore it's like this

logically but physically it's like this we know this is way

faster it's a the next level

really quick I can actually even get to the previous level

just as quickly so this this representation is pretty nice

for us we did this the index of a parent the index of his left

child links of his right child and over to

2n and 2n plus 1

how do I know if an index is a Leaf node.

There's a trickier one.

Which ones are my leaf nodes?

Can you check if the index of a child is outside the size?

Not outside the size, but in the second half is what you're

really looking at,

right?

Or I guess if the index of a child is outside the size, oh

yeah, that works too.

It's a lot trickier.

Works though.

So the index of its child is outside of the tree, Then it is

definitely a leaf node But the easier way to say that is like

there's nine of these things that by divide nine by two I get

four and everything after four is a leaf node

right

The same thing though, right?

Because what would be the child of e the child of e would be 10

and 11 and they are outside there Which is what you said? I

didn't hear it the first time but yes, that's correct

Alright, so now I can pretty easily do some math on these

things and get around inside these trees.

Here's our definition of what a heap is.

This heap ordered tree is one where every node is not

greater than the priority of that node's parent.

So that's what heap ordering is.

It's like a sorted order,

but it's a little less restrictive.

So you see here 81 doesn't have anything in the tree more

important than it.

18 doesn't have anything in its subtree more important than it.

14 similarly has one and five below it.

Now, if these were sorted,

it would also represent a heap-ordered tree because a

sorted order is more restrictive.

So if this just went 81,

18,

14,

9, 7, 5, 4,

2, 1,

I would still be a heap.

But it doesn't have to be sorted to be heap-ordered,

right? The rule for heap ordering is each node's priority

is not greater than the priority of its parent So what if it's

equal it could still be down below its parent So if I were to

put a seven in there I could put seven here

Because sevens priority is not greater than its parent sevens

priority

it's less than or equal to

if I allow duplicates in my pq

So then I've got the second definition that says a heap is a

set of nodes with the keys arranged in complete heap

ordered tree So that's what we'll think of as a heap is

one of those physical arrays of things in heap ordering

All right,

I think that's gonna kill our last minute here

But I'll show you one of these things right before we go So

heap having these two crucial properties,

it has to be complete,

has to be heap ordered.

So logically, this is what the heap from the previous page

looked like.

Physically, this is what it would look like in memory.

And so if you look at this, you say, it looks like it's sorted

in reverse order.

It's close.

It doesn't have to be.

If it were sorted in reverse order, it would definitely be

heap ordered.

But you can see here, I go down 81,

18,

14,

9, 7, And then that one is there, and I promise you there's

going to be somebody in office hours this cycle going to be

like,

yeah, it's just not working. Look at this data.

They're not great.

They don't have to be in reverse order.

If they are, it's good enough.

But it's not necessary. It's sufficient, but not

necessary, right?

Because what is six?

Six is the left child of three.

Six is not more important than three.

So that's what our heaps are gonna look like and all you're

gonna have to do is maintain one of these things in

Project to be and then that's gonna make your life work.

So we'll come back here talk about heaps

Finish up heaps on Tuesday

You can just divide it by two.

And that's because in size it's something we're always keeping

track of. Yeah, you've got the heap size.

See, it's written in that one. It's nine.

And if I've got it in the container, I know how many items

are in the container.

Nine divided by two.

Yeah,

and that's if I'm using that one base indexing.

So a leaf node has no children,

right?

So how does nine divided by two give you the leaf node that

gives you four?

Does that change?

Oh no, a leaf node doesn't have children, but it does have

parents.

So nine divided by two gives me four means that nine has a

parent,

but nine times two would be its child.

So if you wanted to determine if it's a leaf node, you want to

determine if it has no children.

Right, and that was the more evolved way.

It works.

But I said the simpler way is just take the heap size and

divide it by 2.

If you're bigger than half,

then you're a leaf.