All right. So we left
off right
there, big O notation, right?
Sound right?
Feel like we ended up hitting that one.
Yeah, we left this open question here.
So what were the bugs involved with using this version? If you
remember, we looked at this version,
and we said it was n squared,
and we didn't count the steps because we saw there's a for
loop of size n
and a for loop of size n inside of it, and then a constant
amount of work here, even though it varies a little bit,
right? So that's a good question here.
I say it's a constant amount of work inside,
but you see there's an if statement there, so sometimes
it's different. So how can it be constant if
it's different?
The answer to that is it doesn't vary based on size.
It varies based on whether i is equal to j,
but it doesn't vary based on size.
So if when size goes up,
the amount of work inside the loop goes up,
one pass through the loop. Obviously, if size goes up, we
go through the loop more times. But the actual work inside the
loop, if that stays the same regardless of what size does,
then we look at that as a constant amount of work.
So that if I is not equal to J thing does change how many steps
happen in there, but it doesn't change it at a level where N
gets involved.
So N loop,
N loop, constant amount of work.
If j is divisible by two,
it's still not modified by size, right, because if size is 500,
j divisible by two doesn't change how much work is
divisible by five million.
Right, if the work inside,
anything inside the loop.
Right, exactly,
right,
right.
Does that make sense?
So we looked at this and we figured out that it was N
squared too because we also answered the question that was
asked,
how many multiplications? That's what we really figured out.
We figured out that there was N squared minus N multiplications.
Right? Because there's n squared times this happens inside the
inner loop,
but n times it doesn't happen.
So it's n squared minus n, which we were happy to call that big O
n squared.
And we showed how this worked.
It just basically took all of these things and said, well, I'm
not going to multiply this position by this value.
I'm not going to multiply this position by the three.
I will multiply this position the other two values so one
times two gave us this two And I'm not going to multiply by the
one here But three times two gives me six if I don't multiply
by the two here, but three times one gives me three that's how
the function worked, so that's what the goal of this function
was and
It talks about it there in the RME and it shows it in code all
right So the next version said well What if we just multiplied
everything all together,
and then we divided out what we didn't want?
So this ends up filling the exact same output from the
previous input.
Exactly the same. It multiplies them all together.
Three times two times one,
and then divide away the three in the first position.
Divide away the one in the second position.
Divide away the two in the third position.
That's how this one works. But if you look at the loops,
what do you see?
I see I've got an n-based loop here, plus an n-based loop
there,
which makes this whole thing big O n.
That's how many multiplications and divisions I actually have.
That's pretty slick.
Same amount of work,
completely different complexity,
especially when you talk about
what if the size of this container is just a million
items.
It's not much. A megabyte,
a million items here says there's a million
multiplications, a million divisions,
but what happens on the previous slide? A million items times a
million items.
Now we're talking about a trillion multiplications.
So this is two million operations.
This is a trillion minus a million.
Vastly different,
right?
So this is the kind of thing that you would like to be able
to do from an analysis standpoint and say, how could I
write this more efficiently?
Definitely not like this,
but like this.
What's the bug?
What happens if there's a zero in the ray?
Yeah, divide by zero and a horrible crash,
right?
All right, so then I guess we can't do it.
What if we had an if statement checking for zeros? How
could we do that?
What does it look like when there's a zero? What does the
answer look like when there is a zero in there?
Where's the zero?
In i equals zero,
then I guess out i equals zero.
So it, yeah, go for it.
Well, look, remember,
we don't multiply by the thing at that position.
Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
Yeah,
absolutely, if there was a zero in there, the first product
would all be zero.
But I'm saying,
I'm not saying like how does this one work? I'm saying what
should the answer look like?
Perfect, so if there's one zero in there, That's the only output
that has a value because it's the one that didn't get
multiplied by zero all the rest can multiply by zero So they're
all zeros and there's only one value in there and that's the
product of all the other numbers
Make sense and if there's more than one zero two or more then
everybody gets multiplied by a zero.
So the whole answer is zero
So, how can we protect linearity?
with that in mind
Yeah.
Nice.
That makes sense?
So,
if we had some way to keep track of where the zeros were, while
we were making our product,
let's say we set it equal to negative one,
the index of where the zero is.
The first time I see a zero,
I set the index to that location and don't multiply by the zero.
The next time I see a zero,
or if I've ever got a more than one zero,
then I just realize that they're all going to be zeros and I keep
track of that. So I could do this in one pass,
like the product pass,
with some more if stuff going on there right inside the loop at
three.
Does that make sense?
Keep track of it.
You could also say, you know,
when I'm looking at doing a trillion operations,
one more million pass ain't gonna kill me.
So I could have a pass just dedicated to counting and
locating zeroes. if I wanted to simplify the
code.
Just one pass dedicated to counting and locating zeros.
If there's more than two,
then I don't have to do the multiplication.
If there's more than one, I have to do the multiplications at
all.
So it might actually be more efficient if there's a chance of
me having zeros in there.
Just a pass that goes through and counts how many there are.
If there's more than one,
I do no multiplications.
I just spit out all zeros in the output and I'm done.
So you could do it that way,
Or like you said, you could do the multiplications in hopes
that we didn't run into two of them and all the work of
multiplying those things wasn't going to be wasted.
But either way,
you do an additional amount of work
at the linear level while I'm still checking in one pass
while I'm doing the multiplication pass,
I do more,
but it's still happening a linear amount of times and that
linear amount of work can protect you from falling into
quadratic work.
It would be worth it,
very well worth it, to just have a pull-pass that goes through
counts and locates zeroes.
If you did that and you say, okay, well, I don't have to do
any more multiplication,
I don't have to do any division.
It's only when I'm sure that I've got
one or fewer zeroes that I have to do any
multiplication, and if I have no zeroes, that's the only time
that I have to do any division.
So it turns out,
this is an approach that with a little bit more code, it's not
about how little code there is. If you look at this, what do we
have here? There's five lines of code inside the function.
Five lines of code inside the function.
So it's not like we saved space.
So you say, okay, well, I can make it rearrange and then go
like this and it's better complexity.
but if I add like six more lines of code I feel bad about it
because I feel like I added more code but if I add six more lines
of code and it stays linear and
protects me from having to ever go quadratic that six lines of
code is not your problem this is not the thing you're trying to
optimize how can I get the fewest number of lines of code.
One would cause everything but one location to be zero.
The location of the one zero is the only one that didn't get
multiplied,
right? So if there was a zero here,
this would have a six by it and all the rest of these would be
zero.
So I would still have to do a product of all of the other
things if there's one zero.
Right because remember we say we don't multiply by the thing in
this position, but this is the product of everything else
So if the zeros here everything is multiplied by the zero except
this so that's why it's the one winner
All right, so Cuz like right here look there's five lines of
code you say well shoot That's about the best as I can do it's
like only five lines of code. It's not you could rearrange
those five lines like this and be much better.
So having less code isn't your friend.
Having good code that does what you need it to do and not what
you don't need it to do is your friend.
Right?
So if I were to change this, I might say,
if I was gonna put some more stuff here, I'd have the if
statement here to be counting my zeros.
I could do it that way
and locating my index of zero.
The other way that I could do it and then I would have to come
out here and say, Well, if the index of the zero is
something within my range,
if it's non-zero,
if it's non-negative,
and it's less than my size.
So for instance, if you wanted to get really slick with it,
you could say,
I've got this placeholder value,
which I start at negative 1.
And then the first time I see a zero, I'm going to set it to
that location.
Then the second time I see a zero,
I'm gonna set it to size.
That's just way overusing a variable.
Works,
but it makes your code complex, right?
So if it's set to size,
when it comes time to do the division thing, we'll say, well,
if it's size, they're all zeros.
Because size means I've seen more than one zero.
If it's less than zero, that means I haven't seen any zeros.
But if it's anything else, that's the location of the zero
Right, and so you have a bunch of extra coding or say well if
I've seen no zeros then proceed as planned here right if I've
seen one zero fill out all the whole thing with zeros and then
go back to that index and
Put the product that I have
In that location and if the thing is size, I just after I
set everything to zero. I don't do anything
Probably one and a half times more code that I have here,
maybe almost twice as much code,
but still linear because there's nothing inside a nested
size-based loop.
So adding 10 more lines of code to this function to keep it
linear is still what you want to do,
as opposed to worrying about, well, I could try to squeeze
this in.
that's technical talk so I know it's really hard to understand
ah make sense
you're with me okay so here's how we want to do our thought
process when we we get our algorithm we say this is a great
way to do it because this this version right here is a direct
translation of what was asked right in the output location at
i have the product of everything but what's in at i.
That's what this one says.
So it goes through everything, it tries to multiply it all
together,
unless we're at i.
In that case,
that's what I'm saying, this is a direct translation of the RME.
You think about it a little more, you say, well, what if I
did aggregate all of that product and then divide out what
I don't need, and you come up with this version, which is a
good replacement of it, but it has the ability to fail if I
can't control my input.
Now, if I knew ahead of time I was going to get a vector of
size n that is guaranteed to be non-zero,
then this one just worked perfectly.
But I don't have that in my requires,
right? It doesn't say that you're going to have non-zero
values. If I had the non-zero values,
this one's better than the other one and perfect.
All right.
Off of complexity.
Good.
We are behind, by the way. I talked too much,
but I'm hoping that you really get this stuff understood,
and then we'll find a way to catch up.
Big O notation.
We've got this definition of Big O here.
It says f of n, some function,
is Big O of g of n, some other function,
if and only if you logic fans, that's the IFF word,
if and only if there are other constants,
C and N sub zero.
C has to be greater than zero because C is what we're going to
be multiplying our function G of N by.
C times G of N.
And then N sub zero is a particular N value that's
represented here on this graph. You see how this blue curve goes
above the red curve?
But not everywhere.
If there exists some point, however,
where the blue curve goes above the red curve and never again
goes below it,
that's what we call n sub 0.
Right, so I need those two constants there.
The one that I can multiply the function g of n by, and then the
n sub 0 which says there might be some lower order terms or
stuff that go on before here, but once I get past that point
The bounding function is always bigger
So that's what I'm looking for it says so if C is greater than
zero and then sub zero Has to be greater than or equal to zero.
So n sub zero doesn't have to be there, but it could be at zero
however
If I have those things and it shows me that f of n is always
less than or equal to C times g of n once we've passed that n
sub 0 then I can say f of n is bounded by g of n
This is a rehash of some 203 stuff.
Hopefully you got this
Here's some more stuff on it, right? This is a much more
complicated mathy page, but it says some other stuff It says
we've got a sufficient condition if you remember what sufficient
means is if that shows up, we know it's good enough
It's not necessary though, so that means if it doesn't show
up, we can't say that it wasn't enough.
It's just that we don't have it.
So if we get it, it's good enough.
If we don't get it, it's not good enough to not know.
So it says if I can take f of n divided by g of n and take n off
to infinity,
the limit as n goes to infinity of that quotient, if that
converges on something,
It doesn't have to be any particular value, it doesn't
have to go to zero, it doesn't have to go to one,
it just has to go to something that's not infinity.
So there you see it says if the limit as n goes to infinity is
equal to d,
some value that is less than infinity, it does not also go
off to infinity,
then I can say that f of n is big O of g of n.
And here's an example of it.
Is log base two of n is a logarithmic function
big O linear,
big O 2n. I know the two's in there, it's
kind of clunky, but it just makes the algebra a little
easier.
It's just as legal without the n.
The question is that,
right?
Well, let's check this sufficient condition.
What happens when I take log of n divided by 2n and then shoot n
off to infinity?
Well,
log of n as it goes off to infinity is infinity
and 2n as it goes off to infinity is also infinity, So I
can't really tell
This is where calculus comes in. You all loved it.
You're happy you're past it L'Hopital's rule says if we take
the first derivative of those two functions and
Then see what happens.
So what's the first derivative of log n?
1 over n that's right. And what's the first derivative
of 2n?
2.
So if I put that all together I get that 1 over 2n
because the log n dropped the n into the basement when it took
its derivative and the basement just ditched its n.
So that's why I get 1 over 2n after I take the derivative of
both the top and the bottom.
Now when I shoot n off to infinity,
what do I get?
Zero.
It has converged.
So you can use L'Hopital's rule until that infinity over
infinity thing goes away.
I need to take another derivative, take another
derivative, take another derivative until they stop
running off to infinity,
or sorry, until they stop having those n's that run off to
infinity over infinity, yes.
So,
there you have it.
It's very clear from this sufficient condition that log
base two of n is bounded by a linear function.
And that's real basic, we already talked about that when
we talked about the order of these things.
But this is just proof on a concrete function.
And here is another example of it.
Is sine of n over 100,
big O of 100?
What do you think?
Yes,
right?
It's constant.
It's constant, it's a 100, you could have 1,000, there's one,
it's constant.
Why is it constant?
How is that true?
Well, sine does this,
right?
For off into infinity. So as long as I can pick some
constant that's above it, I say,
yes, this constant is bounded by that value, right? I can always
multiply it by something to get my constant up there.
Sine goes up to 75,
I pick 80.
Sine goes up to 112,
I pick 900,
whatever,
right? As long as there's a constant that exists above that,
then I can say it's bounded by. So, we're pretty clear that this
is true.
Sine is bounded by a constant.
Can I apply this rule,
however, to figure that out?
Well, f of n is sine of n over 100,
g of n is 100.
If I take the limit of this as n goes to infinity,
sine of n over 100 divided by 100,
what happens to that?
That doesn't converge,
right?
Sine of n over 100 as n goes to infinity is,
it's out there, right?
So then you can say, well, I have not met the sufficient
condition.
Good news is it's also not necessary.
So the stuff we talked about earlier that said this is true
is true a different way. So if I get it, I can say that I
know enough.
If I don't get it, I've got to figure it out some other way.
That's what sufficient but not necessary means, all right?
All right, how do we drop these constants?
So here's this nifty one,
three N squared plus seven N plus 42.
Is that big O N squared?
And you say,
of course it is, it's N squared,
right?
Well,
I don't know.
If you haven't quite understood those two constants,
let's revisit.
Remember that C.
I said if there's some number that I can multiply the g by
that makes it bigger than the f,
then I might have a shot at it.
And so it looks here like if I multiply by this g,
if I multiply this n squared, what if I multiply that by five?
You would say, well, five n squared is bigger than
three n squared plus seven n plus 42,
most of the time.
So it's possible. as long as I can figure out when
that most of the time starts right and so if you think right
here at at 1 what's going on at 1 for 5 n squared
and 3 n squared plus 7 n plus 42 well both the 5 n squared
and the 3 n squared just contribute their constant
because at 1 n squared is 1 so 5 n squared is just five,
three n squared is just three.
But,
I also have these lower order terms.
So at one,
the f of n adds an additional seven n,
seven more,
plus 42,
49 more,
52 for f of n,
five for g of n.
G of n is down here,
f of n is down there.
But,
those lower order terms don't win forever.
We get out there far enough. What's happening at 10?
At 10, I say three n squared is 300, five n squared is 500.
What's going on at seven n?
Seven times 10, that's 70 more, 370.
Plus 42,
412.
F of n is 412,
g of n is 500.
So now g of n is up above there. So somewhere between one and 10,
for you it's one and 10,
somewhere between one and 10, g of n goes above f of n and then
never gets smaller. So that's why I can say
three n squared plus seven n plus 42 is bounded by n squared
because I could pick five to multiply by,
I could pick five million to multiply by.
We still got some problems down there at that baseline.
So,
what's your question?
As long as you can prove that the limit converges, it's fine.
L'Hopital rules is the easy way to do it on that one.
Yes.
So, you with me on that?
So,
those lower order terms get managed by how many ends I
ignore at the beginning.
I ignore one, I ignore two,
I ignore three.
Once I get out there to a certain point N sub zero,
everything after that,
five N squared is always bigger than three N squared plus seven
N plus 42.
That's what that is. And I could have picked another
number,
six N,
right?
What I didn't want to pick was two N,
right?
Because at two N,
three N squared is always going to be, two N squared,
three N squared is always going to be bigger.
If I pick something bigger than three N,
three,
bigger than three, I'm gonna find it eventually.
The change that the choice of what I whether I pick 4 or 5 or
50 is going to change where n sub 0 shows up But in the end,
I'm not really trying to solve for one particular one All I
want to know is is that function bounded by n squared and it is
because I can find those values Right see here.
It says somewhere between 3 and 4
That's what somebody wrote here on the graph somewhere between 3
and 4 is where n sub 0 is This is where 5n squared and 3n
squared plus 7n plus 42 cross.
After this number,
so any n's greater than 4 or greater,
as long as there's four more items, then I can say for sure
that this curve is always bounded by the other one.
And I know for sure that that's a fact.
All right?
So this is us finding the c and n sub 0 way.
If we go for the sufficient condition way,
all I have to do is divide three n squared plus seven n plus 42
divided by that by n squared.
It's hard to figure out. Both of those go off to
infinity, so I take a derivative.
Three n squared plus seven n plus 42,
first derivative, six n plus seven.
First derivative of n squared,
two n.
Still go off to infinity.
Take the derivative again.
This turns into six in the basement,
two. that converges on three, which
is not infinity, and therefore the sufficient condition holds.
All right?
This is 203,
I know you're happy to be back.
We're gonna leave sooner than you really want to though.
We're gonna leave 203 land.
So here's those two rules of thumb.
Because I have N sub zero,
this allows me to ignore those lower order terms,
right? I'm going to skip the lower-order terms
Skip the numbers where the lower-order terms contribute
enough to beat the bigger function.
That's what ends up zero
Represents and then the C says as long as I can pick something
that will beat this in the long run That's what I've got there.
So this is where the stuff comes in This is why I can ignore the
lower-order terms because of n sub zero and why I can ignore
the leading coefficient is because of C.
I can always pick my own bigger,
better C.
All right.
This is a page out of a math textbook from high school.
Some are log identities.
The only one that really matters is this nifty little change of
base one. They're all true.
But the change of base one says log base a of x is the same as
some other log of x divided by the log of a in that same log,
right? So here's how we can look at this.
And what does that tell you?
x is a variable,
a is a constant.
So if I look at the log, this is, and you don't say normal
math means log base 10. So this is log base 10 of X
divided by log base 10 of a log base 10 of a is a constant
So reality I'm saying log base a of X is
the same as log base 10 of X
times the constant
It's the same as the natural log of X
times a constant.
It's the same as log base 4 of x times a constant.
So any log is a constant away from any other
log.
Log base, I should be saying.
So log base 2 is a constant multiplication factor away from
log base 10.
It's a constant multiplication factor away from natural log
whatever.
So that's what this cool change of base formula tells me.
And the important thing then is,
this is why when we talk about logarithmic complexity,
we don't really care what the base is.
Logarithmic is logarithmic.
So we'll typically be talking about log base too,
we just won't say it.
It's not necessary.
Logarithmic is logarithmic.
And if we're talking about trying to figure it out, sure,
different log bases are going to be different, so if I've got
something that's constantly being divided by two,
it gets small pretty quick.
It's log base two.
But if I'm constantly dividing by five, it gets small quicker.
But it's still logarithmic
as compared to linear or quadratic or exponential or any
other complexity class that we might get stuck in.
So we won't really be concerned about our base, But we will know
that logarithmic is logarithmic because as I said log base 2 is
just a constant multiplication away from log base 3
So I gave away the answer on some of this quiz already well
Let's answer this one is 10 to the 100 big O constant.
Yes is
3 n to the 4th plus 45 n cubed big O n squared
Also, yes right I could pick something bigger than 3 here and
and figure out something to get better than that and we're good,
so there's a couple of trues.
Is three to the N,
big O,
two to the N?
False,
right?
This is basically saying,
no matter how many threes you bring to the party, I'm gonna
bring twos to the party and still beat you.
Not gonna happen,
right?
The other one, though, works,
right?
So remember how many twos you bring to the party, if I bring
threes to the party,
my sign's gonna win, right? Agreed,
and you can also check this one. So this is false here.
You can also check this one here with that sufficient condition,
right?
What is two to the n divided by three to the n? Well, that's
just two thirds quantity to the n.
Something less than one multiplied by itself gets
smaller, gets smaller, gets smaller.
This converges on zero. So yes,
how about 45 log n plus 45 n is that big o log n?
That's poorly written.
We should have the linear thing front
because it's the bigger order term, but people make mistakes
and you gotta be sharp eyes to make sure that you don't miss
stuff, right? Because that's the first term, it's not the
dominant term.
45 n is the dominant term.
How about log n squared is that big o log n?
Yes, right? because we know that the log of n squared
is just equal to two times the log of n.
More math.
So, we'll call this one true. How about the next one?
X and a, that's not how logs work.
So,
that's how we go.
That's what it looks like.
And then it says, can you find f of n and g of n such that f of n
does not bound g of n and g of n does not bound f of n?
I read that backwards,
but you know what I meant.
So it's a g of n does not bound f of n and f of n does not bound
g of n. You got one?
Can't do it?
Anybody do it?
Sine and cosine, yeah, that's a tricky one, but it works.
Yes, sine and cosine will get you there, right? Because sine
goes up, cosine goes down,
they don't bound each other.
There's no way that I can get them to pass.
There's no number that I can multiply there, so that's how we
have it. So those are true, true, false.
True, false, true, false.
and sine and cosine actually do get us the bounding.
All right, so this then is a chart of showing all three of
them. We'll be talking about big O
because it's the easiest way to talk about stuff.
What's my upper bound?
And that's the one over on the far left.
So this is kind of just boiling down the first three or four
slides we already saw on this.
There's the asymptotic upper bound, that's big O.
That's that N sub zero and C statement.
here's the mathematical version of it we saw both of these on
their own separate slide and then here's some of the
consequences of it so I can say something with the asymptotic
upper bound I look at this f of n as 2n plus 1 you say well
that's big O of n you would be correct but what if I said it's
big O of n squared you would also be correct because n
squared is always bigger than 2n plus 1 once you get out there
somewhere so So, the asymptotic upper bound
can be really lazy.
You could just say,
well,
that's exponential,
and not be wrong from an upper bound standpoint,
almost ever,
right?
It's always exponential.
It's bounded by exponential, but it doesn't mean that the
function itself is exponential.
So,
that's what the upper bound looks like.
It's got this side effect, we could go higher and be lazy.
So when we talk about on the exam we'll be talking about the
tightest upper bound, right?
If you look over here this is just the opposite this is big
Omega that's the lower bound what function is always below
the other function and all it is is it's just for complete
reversal of the big O definition.
Big Omega just says as long as there's some C and N sub 0 such
that c times g of n is always less than f of n,
then I can say it's bounded below by g of n.
So that's big Omega,
and you can see here the same sort of thing.
I could pretty much choose constant for everything and it'd
be below that.
That doesn't make it really precise because f of n, when
it's 2n plus 1,
you can say that's really big Omega of n.
Linear gets under there, it can stay under there always.
As long as I've got some constant less than two,
I can do it.
Then in the middle's the combination.
This is big theta.
So this is the one we're gonna be really asking for on the
exam.
The only difference between big O and big theta is big O is as
tight as it can be.
So I can't just throw on extra ends and be correct like I can
with big O. in big theta, it's limited
exactly to that, right?
Because I have to have some function that can both have a
constant that multiplies and keeps it above,
and another constant that multiplies and keeps it below.
That's what the tight bound is. I can use the same curve.
So with two n plus one, I can say, well, four n is always
bigger than it,
and one n is always less than it.
That's why I know that it's bounded by this linear function.
Same thing here, this bottom one, you see, this n squared
plus n plus 5,
I can say 2n squared is always bigger than that,
and one half n squared is always less than that.
One n squared is always less than that after I get past some
spot,
so it exists.
So this is what the tight bound is.
It's really the combination of the upper bound and the lower
bound. If I can find a function that
does the both of them, then that's what I would call the big
theta, the asymptotic.
Tight bound.
All right.
That's enough 203 for the day,
wouldn't you say?
That's what the slide says.
Deep breath.
Blow out those 203 vibes.
You save them for later.
You want them back.
No?
203 usually has class right after this, so we always hand it
off the room to them. It's all warmed up.
Okay. Okay,
now we're talking about amortized complexity.
Remember I mentioned this one earlier.
This is what happens when I push into a vector and sometimes
there's plenty of space.
I just push it in there and it's constant time.
Other times I'm completely out of space and I have to copy
everything somewhere else and that takes me linear time.
Amortized complexity is a type of worst case complexity when my
profile, we call it spiky.
Like this one's expensive and then there's a bunch of cheap
ones.
This one's expensive and then there's a bunch of cheap ones
that's with a spiky thing so the only way to really get a good
analysis of that is to take the cost of the expensive one plus
all of the cheap ones that it gives you you add all of that up
together and divide by how many of them that I did that's what
amortize is I need to go from one peak all the way up to but
not including the next peak or if you want to go the other
route you can say let me start at the first cheap one and go
all the way up through the peak.
Either way the division works out to be the same.
So that's what amortized complexity is and we'll see it
in the STL.
Some of the documentation talks about containers and functions
being amortized constant.
So this is us performing some analysis over now a sequence of
operations because I wouldn't want to say well let me just
pick two of them because I could pick two really cheap ones and
the thing well it's always cheap and that would be wrong,
right?
Or I could pick the really expensive one,
linear,
and one cheap one.
Say, well that average is out to linear,
and over two.
That's not right either, right? Because it's not linear every
time.
If I pick four small ones, it would look like it's always
small, you know what I'm saying?
So the only way to do that is to take the entire range from the
most expensive all the way up to the next most expensive.
So,
for instance, if I double my container size and I go now I
went from 100 to 200 it cost me 100 to copy them over then I get
100 cheap ones so then the amount of work that I did was
the 100 copies plus the 100 cheap insertions
basically 200 work for 100
items inserted so 200 work for 100 items inserted looks like
an amortized average of about two work per item, which is why
I can say it's amortized constant, and that's what this
is going to be talking about here.
So it considers this sequence of operations.
It's not actually average case complexity.
So I didn't want to say average in there.
It's not an average,
because average case complexity is one event that represents all
possible events on average it's like this so any other event is
like this whereas an amortized complexity I say well the
average is just to work that doesn't represent all the other
events because one of those events is n work and two does
not represent n so we have to understand this just so we can
figure out how this thing works so here's our example we got a
phone in our pocket how does this work you pay at the
beginning of the Let's say you pay a hundred dollars once a
month, and then you got unlimited calls and unlimited
texts
so
The amount of money coming out of my pocket
Looks like a hundred dollars today zero zero zero zero zero
zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero zero It was
like what's the average that I pay well if I pick five days?
Maybe I pay nothing for my phone bill as long as I don't make
calls on the first day of the month do Do I get a free phone
bill every month?
No,
they still amortize it out.
So say, well, if I make 1,000 calls and texts,
how do I know what they cost me per call or text?
Because if I make 50 calls on the second day and I didn't pay
anything,
it looks like every call is free.
But I have to factor in how much I paid and what it gave me.
If I say I paid $100 and then made these 1,000 calls, then
it's pretty easy. I take those 1,000 calls, divide
by the $100,
and I get it's $0.10 a call or text or something like
that. So this is our spiky input
profile.
The money goes out of our pocket,
not like, oh, here's a call, $0.10.
Here's a call, $0.10.
Here's a call, $0.10.
We're not doing that.
We're paying once, and then we amortize the cost over the
month,
which is really cool in some situations, like in a phone
situation where I have like 2,000 calls,
now my calls just get cheaper.
I don't have a smaller bill,
but they do have a point where if you use too much data,
your stuff goes up. That's when you break the
amortization.
But in the case of a vector, I can't slip more than the things
in there. So I can't really break the
amortization. I just have to go get new space
when I run out.
All right?
So that's what amortized constant means.
I take the cost of the expensive one and all the cheap ones,
add that up,
divide by the total number of ones, and then that's where my
constant value comes out. So we call this amortized
constant, and this is just a shot from that.
If needed, allocate a bigger array and copy the data,
add the new element, and so on. So, in this version of it, this
is one that would give me an amortized constant profile.
Little bit more math.
Here's the rules.
Analyze the asymptotic runtime complexity of the push
operation.
All right, so,
let's start and say that the vector is
size n,
got n in it, so it's full.
I'm trying to do a push.
so when I go to push the first thing I have to do is get new
memory so there's one step which is hey allocate me to n
locations and then there's n work to copy the n from the
original into this new one so I can say that the double the
vector takes me one allocate plus theta n
copy steps now I can get these
n constant time pushes because I have space available for them so
I get these n pushes and each one of them takes me one step
because it's constant time so I can add those two things up
right I say one for the allocation theta n for the copy
plus n insertions that happen in constant time,
that's all the work that it took me to do n pushes.
So I take this 1 plus theta n plus n times theta 1 divide
that by n because that's the work I did for the pushes that I
got and you see that this comes out to something that looks
constant,
right?
What's 1 plus theta n?
It's theta n, right?
So this goes down to theta n.
And then what's n times theta 1?
Also theta n,
right?
Constant n times is is n, right? So that's theta n.
So what's theta n plus theta n?
Theta n.
Theta n divided by n, that's theta one.
So this is why this is amortized constant.
From the math.
Question is, what is the average time complexity?
There isn't an average time complexity because we can't
reliably pick any.
So, that's what I said in the previous slide.
An average time complexity says,
here is something that represents all of the other
ones. All of the other ones look like
this,
right? So you say,
well, on average it takes me two work to do this, which is
correct for most of them.
But for that really expensive one which takes me n work,
two is not the right answer for saying it looks like this.
So we can't have an average case when one,
here's what it is,
when one operation could be constant time but the same
operation,
push,
could be linear time,
I can't do an average.
I have to amortize
because the same operation has a different execution profile.
If the same operation always had the same profile, then I could
just pick 10, 20, 50,
5,000 and average them out and say, here's my average, and be
correct.
But sometimes it's linear and other times it's constant,
so I can't do an average.
So what would this analysis look like instead of doubling the
metrics like you added a constant amount of elements? Oh
my man,
this is my setup here,
right? So the question was,
what happens if instead of doubling the size,
I just increase it by a constant amount?
What happens?
I got a slide for this, that's why I was so excited.
Introduce my slide for me.
So,
with constant growth, you see it up there.
Right, see I've got one plus theta n,
Allocate,
copy the old,
and now since I've only growed my sum constant, we say, well,
I'm not gonna double this. Every time I run out of space,
I'm just gonna go get 100 more,
because I like hundreds.
So I get 100 more, so then I've got the allocate copy plus 100
cheap operations.
So that's only gonna support 100 new pushes.
So now I don't get to divide by N anymore,
I only get to divide by C.
Because when I was dividing by N it said,
well you made room for N new things, so you got to do N new
pushes.
Now I only made room for 100 things, so I only get to do 100
pushes.
So if I divide that,
what does this look like, right?
This looks like,
as it did before, this is just theta N,
and well this is just,
Constant.
Right?
Constant amount of work times a constant value.
That's constant. So when I add these two things
together,
I end up with theta N. Theta N plus theta one is theta
N.
Now I get to divide this by C.
What's linear divided by C?
Linear.
So if,
and this is the really awkward wording part,
if I grow by a linear amount, I get amortized.
Constant.
If I grow by a constant amount, I get amortized linear.
See it?
This is why they double.
And the double's actually kind of a choice, too, though.
As long as I'm growing by something that's a factor of n,
I've got amortized constant. So I could triple.
I could quadruple.
because it would keep my upper linear
and would keep my lower linear if I multiplied by four.
I could even grow by half the size.
Every time I run out of space I'm gonna go get 50% more.
As long as I get 50% more and that 50% grows with my
container,
100 gets me 50 more, 150 gets me 75 more,
225 gets me 113 more. as long as I'm growing by some
factor of n, it ends up being amortized constant.
And that amortized constant factor grows or shrinks
based on the factor that I have related to the n.
So if I double it,
it's looking like two work per thing.
If I triple it,
if I quadruple it,
you see where I'm going with this?
I'm dividing by a bigger number there so
Here's my container growth options if I grow constant I
will have amortized
Linear
Complexity so in the end it looks like and so here's a
really good example Imagine you said well, I'm only gonna grow
by 10 because I'm real cheap keep down to 10 I'm at a million
items now. I run out of space all right
well Let's copy a million items.
I can push 10 more.
I'm out of space.
Now I've got to copy a million and 10 items.
Push 10 more.
Every 10 times I'm pushing a million items.
It feels like I'm pushing 100,000 items every time I push.
That's because I don't have the big growth.
So you take it to an extreme level and you can see why,
you know,
what if the growth is small?
What if the growth is, When I run out of space, I'm gonna add
two more.
I'm at a million,
I put one in,
put another one in, now I gotta go get a million more.
Put one in, put one in,
I gotta go get a million more. You know what I'm saying?
And so it feels like every other time I'm going to get a million
more.
So the smaller my constant is, the more it feels like it's a
full-on linear thing. Even with a big constant,
I'm gonna get some linear response.
But a small constant's gonna make it real obvious is that
this is taking linear time to do this thing.
All right, I skipped a blank slide in there where I was gonna
draw some stuff but I've pretty much waved my hands and shouted
enough,
the example to go through.
So I was talking about the million plus 10 here,
all the other things.
It's kind of like a trade-off when you trade a little bit
better.
That's all it is, it's always a trade-off.
I'm trading memory for time.
Yeah, absolutely. So the doubling it is what
they've, you know,
makes good sense.
Like being off by a factor of two isn't terrible in terms of
like how much memory it costs us and how much time it takes.
We could have a better time response if we always grew by a
factor of eight,
then we probably have more memory issues, right?
And we similarly, we could save more memory if we only grew by a
quarter, but it would seem to be running a bit more sluggishly
because every time I ran out of space, I would be doing more
work and I'll be running out of space more often.
In the case of like a vector where we double the sides,
is it like the amortized complexity being constant, kind
of like saying like,
since we have to copy over n elements and then push n
elements constant time,
isn't that kind of thing like,
all of those steps in total equivalent
that the pushback would be equal to like two?
Right, that's what the amortized constant and looks like it takes
two steps per push,
but one of them is going to be slow, but over the life of the
container,
it's not like,
the time you will have spent totally will still look like,
that's what amortized complexity means.
So after I push a full end with the copy and filling it up
again,
it still feels like of those 100 pushes, I only did 200 work,
right? It just didn't all happen at once, because like 100 of
them were at one work, and then the one of them was at 100 work.
So over the life of that,
it looked like two end per push, even though one of them was much
more expensive than all the others.
Yeah.
Yeah.
There's some memory allocators that you can futz around with in
the STL
that you can sort of work on that with, right? And if you
need to, you can always obviously roll your own vectors,
a pretty low-key thing. But yeah, you can definitely
mess around with the memory allocators.
All right, so that complexity analysis.
Balance exercise,
right? This is not what happens when you're out driving
too late.
It's a completely different balance exercise which I will
neither confirm nor deny that I have done in the past after
dark.
Ugh! Ugh!
Ugh!
Ugh! I have no-
Moving on!
Alright,
so
Uhh,
this is a balance, this is how they used to weigh things.
You didn't really have a scale, you would just weigh this
compared to that.
Did you bring me enough rice?
Well, here's my rock that you have to bring me enough rice to
weigh as much as this rock.
That's what a balance does.
So,
here we have these billiard balls, though someone has
monkeied with one of them, and it has different weight.
The goal is to try to figure out which one does it, right? And
all we have is a balance.
Can we describe an n-squared algorithm to do this?
That's one of the hard ones.
Can I describe a linear algorithm to find the heavy
ball?
Then after that, can I describe a couple of different
logarithmic algorithms to find the heavy ball?
All right?
Who wants to crack at the hard one, what's the n squared
algorithm?
Yeah.
That's right.
If I compare every pair of things,
that's gonna be n squared work,
right?
So here,
weigh all possible pairs
and check if any was an imbalance.
And why I said this one was a hard one was because at one
point you will have found the heavy ball and you will still
have work to do.
So like the hard part is thinking of like, why would
this,
it seems unnecessary,
right? But this one is something we'll have fun with throughout
this semester. This is really just n choose k.
Of the k things that I have,
how many ways,
sorry, of the n things that I have, how many ways can I choose
two of them?
Right, and it's just n factorial divided by k factorial times the
quantity of n minus k factorial. That's n choose two.
When we're comparing all possible pairs and finding
balance,
do we still have a bigger number,
right?
As a result?
Say that again.
When we compare like all the pairs.
And we find out the numbers are different.
Yeah. Or the result will be the bigger
number. Right,
yeah.
So as I look at this n choose k,
this is what it shakes out as, really.
This is when we say approximately n squared,
the actual number is n times n minus one over two.
Right, and this is the same thing as the handshake.
Remember that, it's a pre-COVID thing, people used to touch each
other.
Handshake when you meet somebody.
Right now it's fist bump. So I guess it's the fist bump,
that's fine.
The fist bump problem, I learned it as a handshake when I was in
school.
How do I get everybody in the room to meet and shake hands
with everybody else?
Well, there's N of you,
and everybody but you is N minus one other people.
So you have to shake N minus one,
fist bump N minus one other people, and there's N of you
that all have to do it.
But when you fist bump him,
he also fist bumps you, So we don't have to do that twice,
once for you and once for him.
The one is good enough, so we can divide by two here.
And people have to,
so built in, have to fist bump n minus one other people, and
every time I do it, I satisfy two people's requirements.
So this is n times n minus one over two, which is still big O n
squared. That's n choose two,
that's what we say when I gotta compare everything.
There's always gonna be something n squared there.
All right, so I'm sure you figured out how to do the linear
one. that's much easier, right?
Just pick any ball and weigh all the rest of them against it
until you find the heavy one and then you're done.
That's pretty straightforward,
right?
Pick one, compare it to the other, N minus one until you
find the imbalance.
That's the easy one.
How about my logarithmic version?
How do I do a logarithmic version of this?
Yeah.
and then divide that one,
okay.
Yeah,
make sense?
So remember I said it's gonna be linear if you're plus-plusing or
minus-minusing.
And it's probably gonna be logarithmic if you're taking
your work and dividing it by two
or multiplying your jumper by two or something like that.
So if we take half the balls, put them here, half the balls,
put them there, then with one weighing,
I can say, you know what? but it's definitely not you have.
You have 5,000 balls,
2,500 here, 2,500 there, with one weighing,
I can throw away 2,500 of them.
That is speed right there,
compared to our previous linear and or quadratic versions,
right?
Then I take the next 2,500,
split them at 1,250 each,
and figure out after two weighings, I've gotten rid of
3,750 balls,
that's pretty slick.
What do I do when it's odd though?
Make sense?
So we've got nine of them.
I put four here and four there.
If it's here,
this goes down.
If it's there,
that goes down.
If they stay together,
that's the one.
So that's how that version works.
This lets us do something that this is going to be the
two-group version.
And there's a question. Why is it sometimes
problematical?
Because sometimes we run into odd numbers.
But this one is a
big O log base 2 of n because we're dividing by 2.
So what's our
other logarithmic version?
Is there another one we could do?
Instead of two groups, three groups.
Same thing with that odd number thingy, right?
So if it's nine, I go three, three, three,
perfect.
One of them's got it, the other two can go away.
If it's eight, I go three, three, two,
same thing.
Two of these groups are going away.
So with three,
I can keep dividing it and dividing it when there's an
offset,
right? So what happens if I got seven? Seven is like three,
three, one.
And it's either that heavy ball there or one of these three.
Just pick any number you like, right?
That's 20,
any non-base three number.
23,
right? What do I put 23 in there?
I've got 11 and 11 and one.
It's good.
22,
I got 10 and 10 and two.
I can figure it out.
So three groups.
Now, that's what I'm looking at. I already gave this away earlier
on the math slide here.
If I've got two groups, I say that's log base 2 of n.
And the question is, is that log base 3 of n? And the answer, of
course, is yes,
right?
There's a change of base formula,
right?
So it looks kind of like this because I can say log base 3 of
n Is the same as log base 2 of n divided by log base 2 of 3 the
change of base formula for logs
Right and so since log base 2 of 3 is a constant I can say that
this thing right here 1 over log base 2 of 3 this is just a
constant times log base 2 of n So I can say the log base 3 of n
is
Some C times log base 2 of n. So yes, they're the same
complexity
Why didn't we try for a third logarithmic algorithm where I
said let me divide it by four because three made it faster.
Wouldn't four make it faster?
Faster still?
Four starts to fall apart because now I say well I got
these two.
Well they're both the same.
Well at least I know it's not in there
but do I know where it is? no cuz I've got the other two and
divide that and then do that so with the two or the three
I can use the balance once with four or more I have to use the
balance more than once right because to figure out which one
of these four has the heavy in it in the worst case I've got to
do these two and then do the second two on a second weighing.
So that's why we don't go up to higher divisions because we stop
being able to use the balance once and then that breaks why we
were cutting it in half.
Imagine if I just, it'd be way faster if I just divided it into
eight parts.
Yeah, great, but I still have to do at least four weighings to
figure out which one of the eight it is and so I haven't
really sped anything up because the next step takes more work to
get to.
To divide by eight again, I have to weigh four times.
So,
all right,
there's the balanced exercise.
You are now officially done with Thursday's lecture.
Puts us in time to jump onto today's lecture.
Fear not,
we always get behind.
The slides are improperly spaced out.
So the other classes are also behind.
They're maybe a little bit less behind than I am, but we always
end up behind here. And then there's a lecture near
the end of the pre-midterm stuff that is quite short, and then we
always catch up at that point.
So,
as I said, I'm a bit behind right now, but I will catch up.
Replace it.
Run it.
All right.
We got time for a section or two out of this
Let's get after it.
All right, so
Measuring runtime performance.
Here's that function. We said earlier was a good way
to keep that thing linear But it had the bugs in it.
So this is the the buggy version still
But as we looked at it,
here you see us counting all the steps involved there, and adding
it all up, it looks like it's linear.
So that's what we're used to.
We have n as our input size. This is just a review slide, so
we're good with that.
How about ways to measure complexity here?
We've already been talking about analytically.
That's what we've been going on right now.
Analyze the code itself.
Recognize some common algorithms or patterns.
When we can't do that,
we count steps.
And we also have recurrence relations to help us with that.
Did I miss recurrence relations?
No, we did some recurrence in there.
We'll do some more in a bit.
So we can do recurrence
relations.
You talked about it in 203, we haven't talked about it yet.
Empirically though,
we can do some stuff like measuring the runtime
programmatically, which means usually marking up your code,
tooling it up with some stuff to measure stuff in your code.
That's one way to do it when you own the code.
You can also use external tools if you can't or don't want to
modify the actual runtime.
You can do that with some external tools.
And you always want to make sure that you test on inputs of a
variety of sizes.
So when we look at it.
Programmatically means take measurements from inside the
code.
The plus three n come from.
So I've got one plus. So it looks like
this thing is that one there.
This for loop is two plus two n.
And in this situation, I've got a dereference,
a multiplication,
and an assignment.
And so there's three steps inside the loop.
And so that's where this three n comes from this line right
there.
Right, and this is one,
two, three,
four, because I'm writing it into out.
so this comes from this line right there.
Good?
All right,
good call.
Oh,
I was trying to do a Duo.
Yes, it's me.
Everybody loves Duo.
All right,
so this code here was written by Professor Kamel.
I don't know if any of you have had him yet.
He was a 280 regular for a while.
He rotates in and out.
If not, you might see him later.
He wrote this for us.
Not that we couldn't have written it ourselves.
We just thought it was a clean way to do it.
So we give him some credit.
But this is code that I could insert into my code to actually
measure runtime in there.
And you see it includes this stuff from the chrono library.
And this one creates some class called timer.
And the timer has two private variables, one called cur,
which is the current time, and another one, which is a duration
that's called elap for elapsed time.
It's got a constructor there.
Timer gets created. It calls the default constructor
on cur.
So cur sets the current time, and then it sets elap to zero.
That's what the default constructor does.
Then I've got these three functions,
stop, start, and reset,
which if you've ever used a stopwatch,
it does exactly that.
Start,
stop,
and then reset.
So when I hit start,
all it does is say, well, the current time is now.
So later on, when I say stop,
I can measure the time at that now minus the current now and
tell you how much time has elapsed.
So that's what you see there in line 14.
Elap plus equals what the current now is minus the old
now.
Reset just sets ELAP back to zero, much like the constructor
did.
And so this one allows you to do sort of lap times.
So you can do a start and stop and start and stop.
You keep adding to it like that.
And then there's this getter at the end that says, give me the
total number of seconds used.
This returns ELAP as count there.
So this is how it could be used. You see over here in this main,
I declare a timer tclass line 26.
Start the timer in 27.
Do some stuff in 28.
Stop the timer when I get done.
And then it feels like my iPad just decided that the lecture
was over.
So it left the screen.
You can check out the rest of this code.
It's going to help us with the rest of the demonstration we
come back to on Thursday.
