Then I scroll all the way down and it says this number leaks,

could I run leak checking if I exit the air?

If I had to exit one more signal a test case would leak check.

All of the times that I exit the air is when you have a wrong

input.

Right,

but you could also have this fail,

there's one of the tests that we need you to pass,

or we'll try it and then we do it.

So in essence,

there's three of them that you have to pass,

with a zero,

right?

So like,

it's not that long.

But there's the test that passed, that I passed with a

zero, that should have, no,

I passed with a one that shouldn't have passed with a

zero? Well, you didn't necessarily pass the one, you

might have just crashed or whatever.

You might have failed for some other reason.

So,

I just...

One of the tests that we checked before running,

we're checking them to say,

okay,

you're probably doing the right kind of test.

Wait, but this is the wrong answer,

Barry.

Right, right, but it's slowly so-called.

We need to pass those tests.

Because while you're failing it, it's unclear to the autograder

at that time, right? Okay, so in essence, there are some tests in

here that I just have to not fail.

For it to, well,

does failure count as, what's it called, being like over memory

over time, but not like too long?

No, those are just penalized. Okay, perfect.

So in essence, I just need to hope and pray that the ones I

get,

the ones I fix, the right ones,

and then that's 10 to 20 points right there,

assuming I do correctly.

Also,

do you have any issues with Marie if you don't need to do

it?

No, not really.

That's fine.

Cheers, everyone.

Thank you. Yeah.

I appreciate it. No problem.

I'm over it for five.

That works.

Bye,

bye now.

Go back.

Whistle.

I'll go out closer.

Ok, I'll take a nap.

Smile.

All right,

so um zoom does this nifty little little summary thing you

see here I'm in the process of putting together a site so you

can access all of these things it's just gonna be a github

pages site got everything out there separated up until this

week so I thought I was gonna show you the actual one but I

didn't realize I hadn't pushed it so it's still stuck in my

laptop but this is kind of cool it's all of the stuff over

there,

all the stuff on that thing is, you know, transcripted.

And so then at the end of it,

it builds this thing. It's a quick recap,

next steps,

and it gives a summary of the things that we discussed in

there.

And I do a little bit of cleanup and then drop it into a markdown

file.

And I should have those accessible to you here by the

end of this weekend.

So I'll get something back out to you about how to track it

down. It might be a nice way to recap

stuff, and I am still always trying to figure out

how to use these GenII tools in useful ways.

And so I was just walking across the courtyard today thinking of

one.

I am going to try it with the transcripts and see how well it

can clean up the transcripts.

So I do not know. We will come up with something.

Let us see if I can add that to the site as well.

So this will just keep flowing,

and maybe you can get something out of it.

All right,

so we left off talking about these

2D containers,

and we had talked about a 2D container that was done at

compile time. This is where we were given a

C-style array with square brackets and constants to use

for its size because we couldn't control that at runtime.

But then we looked at this version, which does allow us

runtime control because we're in charge of doing the memory

management ourself by using new square brackets.

New square brackets goes and gets you an array of those

things.

So in the first new square brackets up there in line four,

I say give me a new square brackets of int pointers.

So now I've got an array of int pointers,

and that's what a is pointing to up there.

So each one of those pointers points to a section of where I

can find ints, right?

It's not even an array of int pointers, I said that

incorrectly.

Because if you look at it, what's the type in four?

It's an array of pointer to pointer to int.

Int pointer pointer a.

So a is pointers to pointers to ints.

So as I go to a, you see it pointing to that memory location

that I fill in with those three blocks on the new, The 0, 1, 2

in each one of them is,

I hope nothing's gone wrong at the village.

Yeah,

I can't deal with them right now.

There we go.

So then now that I've got this array,

I give it some size with the new thing and that's what gives me

vertical rectangle there and then in line seven and eight I

loop through each one of those things which start out as

formless and say give me a pointer to

a block of memory that holds actual

ints and so you see this new square brackets ints so what I

get in these horizontal rectangles are places to hold

ins and then that new is going to return me a pointer which I

can very happily stick in there in a at r so every time I use a

new I have to use delete every time I use new square brackets I

have to use delete square brackets so I'm not declaring

any one object in these ones these are all sorry not

declaring uh I'm not allocating any single object all of these

are allocating multiple objects so you use square brackets on

those allocations new square brackets so that gives me a

pointer not an item new does that and then at the end here

you see I have to undo everything that they did over

there and I do it in reverse order so I make new for the

outer one then loop through for the inners on the news in four

and seven eight and then I delete the inners delete square

brackets and then delete square brackets the outer there so

that's the work that I have to do if I want to have my own

C-style arrays.

This is what Vector does for you.

Vector does this.

It does the memory allocation. We say I want one more, I want

to push back and there is not enough room.

It does all of this junk for you.

It does all the news, it does all the deletes.

It is nice.

So delete square brackets is going to go through and call the

destructor on each one of those things.

So if they're objects, they'll get destructed.

If they're just built-in types, there's no real destructor for

an int, for instance, and to just clean that up and go away

with it. But in order for this to be

good,

delete square brackets has to call a destructor.

Just like new square brackets calls a constructor.

So the constructor gets called for you.

In this case, we're just making integers so there's no need to

call a constructor.

But if I had some, for instance,

a new square brackets stock order and there was a

constructor for a stock order, it would initialize all the

stock orders and then it would call a destructor as well.

So what was your question on memory?

It will call the destructor on each one of those items and then

free up any memory that those things were granted initially.

Now if they went and got their own dynamic memory, it's their

job in their destructor to get rid of their own dynamic memory.

Yes,

right, right,

so if we just called delete here, it would get rid of that

square, that vertical box.

It would free that memory up.

It wouldn't free up the memory to the horizontal boxes, and

then I would no longer have an access to those horizontal boxes

because that would be considered unusable memory here in the

vertical A. so that would be creating a

memory leak if I were to do this before that,

and then this would probably end up, it might end up segfaulting,

it's hard to say, sometimes it'll let you get by,

but you'll definitely be in the I hope it works zone as opposed

to I know it will work if I do it in this order.

When you make a nested vector,

does it do this directly,

or will it allocate an array of vectors?

So,

when we're talking about nested vectors, this is something I

also said in office hours the other day to somebody, is

there's no such thing as a two-dimensional vector.

We say it because it's an easy way to say it, that's actually

like syntactic speaking.

What we really have is a vector of vectors.

So each vector is always only one dimension.

So if I have a vector of vectors, that's just saying,

here's a collection of things.

Oh yeah, and each one of those things are a collection of

things,

right? So if I do a resize on the outer vector, I'll get

50 empty vectors.

Then I will have to go fill them in.

And so some people are looping there.

There's also some syntax in the way that the resize or the

constructor works that will allow you to do multiple

dimensions at once.

But you could,

as this one does as well, if I had a vector of size 50, then I

could loop through and make each one whatever size I wanted if I

wanted them to be different sizes but if I want them to be

all the same size it's easy enough to do that in one line I

think I have it here I'll show you I think it's on this slide

somewhere yeah I think it's there I'll show you that in a

minute that's how you should be doing it it's weird that it

comes up at this order in the lecture series that you should

have been doing your 2d map this way I found somebody's there

yesterday and they weren't resizing properly right and

sometimes it works and sometimes it didn't.

It was a really, really interesting bug.

So there we go. Let's pro and con these.

The fixed arrays, this is one where I give it the sizes at

compile time.

The pros and cons are it's deallocated when it goes out of

scope. That's nice, I don't have to do

any memory management myself.

And this square brackets I, square brackets J uses one

memory operation because the compiler knows the width of each

row and you give it two square brackets,

it does the multiply the row number by the column width and

add the column position and then turns it into one memory access

so that's a little bit faster even though it's the same syntax

it's pretty interesting the cons are it doesn't work for a large

end because you're trying to put all of this in your stack frame

and there's only so big that you can make your 2d or multiple D

array the size is fixed at compile time that's also a

limiting factor if you have dynamic data and then lastly

they can be difficult to pass as arguments to functions because

you have to pass them with their second dimension.

So if I was gonna pass a 2D array, I would have to say,

as a parameter,

I would have to say something like, you know,

int parameter four.

That's how you would pass it in a function call.

As a type, because it has to know that the width of the

columns is four. and the same thing is true if I

go for a three-dimensional one so I might have to do something

like int p square brackets you know for

10 so I would have to know that stuff at compile time because

this is the only way that I can declare them as parameters and

functions so what we want to do however for the most part is to

avoid fixed length buffers which means all of this stuff that I

have to do a compile time for setting size should really only

ever be used when your size is known and accurate.

An old practice was to just pick some numbers,

say, hey, I'm going to put your name in there, like what's a

really long first name, what's a really long last name.

I bet you I can probably get it with 30 characters,

and just declare 30 bytes and then use that.

That works, there's nothing wrong with it in terms of its

functionality.

But what happens is when that memory gets allocated, the

memory isn't reset so whatever used

to live in that memory still does live in that memory so a

nefarious actor could just repeatedly ask for bunches of

memory and then go look at what's in them maybe some other

program had

recently used a password or things like that and so we want

to avoid these fixed length buffers,

like at compile time, I'm gonna use this much,

I don't know, maybe 200 bytes,

and then somebody asks me for four bytes and I dump 200 bytes

back at them, they can go in and read documents if a document was

previously in memory there.

So we wanna avoid a fixed length buffer when there's variable

length data.

Does that make sense?

Make it the size you want,

yeah.

It's not buffer overflow,

it's being able to look past the data in a buffer.

So like I said,

if I gave myself 200 bytes to put some stuff in there and then

somebody said, okay, well,

your first name is Steve, right? So then I put an STEVE null

terminator and then there's 194 bytes of data that existed

somewhere else. So we haven't overflown the

buffer, but we've sent back more information than we should.

It is a security issue, but it doesn't throw an error because

you said I wanted 200.

The fact that I'm only using six of them, that's my choice.

So I still have 200 and walking through the rest of them is

legal because that's memory that's specced for you.

But you haven't cleaned it up.

Sure.

But I mean, at some point there was a program running before

you, right? I mean,

it's not like we have your own memory forever, for every

individual program. They all have to reuse some

memory from a previous time. So it's not going to be like

able to, I think what you're saying is, it's not going to be

able to look into some active document on another memory

segment.

That's not the way it's going to be working, but something had

already been running in there, and if I just get my software to

keep running as often as possible and keep asking

questions and getting terribly long answers, I can,

throughout the day,

I can scoop your whole machine.

So,

yeah.

This is the pros and cons of a fixed C-style array,

yeah.

Fixed size.

Right.

So in this one,

see here's where we delete the rows.

This deletes each one of the rows.

This is the horizontal whites going away, and then this is the

vertical white going away.

No.

The delete square brackets calls the destructor on everything in

that container.

So each one of these goes through and calls the

destructor. So this one here will say let's

call the destructor on zero, call the destructor on one, call

the destructor on two, and then free up the memory of that first

thing.

Then it goes back to the next loop and says call the

destructor on three, call it on four, call it on five, and then

free up that memory.

And so the same thing goes on when we finally get out of

there.

It says, okay, we'll call the destructor, if necessary, on

zero,

on one, on two,

and then free up the vertical memory there.

No,

it does not,

right, because what if I had another pointer to that and I

didn't want you to delete it,

right?

That's why when you get it with that new square brackets there

in 8,

you have to get rid of it yourself with this delete square

brackets in 18.

When I got it in 4, I get rid of it here in 20,

yeah.

All right,

the pros and cons of the dynamic stuff.

This is where we are doing the second version here with news

and square brackets, right? The pros are we can do triangular

arrays or misshapen things, jagged arrays, whatever you want

to call them.

Not every row has to be the same length.

It allows copying and swapping rows more quickly.

I could do that and say, well, I want this row to be swapped with

that row, and since they're just pointers, I just change a couple

of pointers,

and now a whole row has been flipped.

Or if I want to invert a matrix,

I only have to deal with the pointers on there and not

the actual values.

So this allows that to happen. The size can be changed at

runtime.

The cons are you have to do all the memory management yourself.

You have to do the deletes. You have to do the news.

It can crash or leak memory if you're not careful.

And then because this is now two separate locations in memory,

AI square brackets J is two memory accesses, so it's a

little bit slower.

The STL obviously gives us a vector and we can do that if we

wanna do dynamic memory with containers,

the vector is a much cleaner way to do it.

It's doing essentially all of the exact same stuff, it's not

magic,

it's just somebody else wrote it and they tested it and they

debugged it and they made it as efficient as possible,

that's why we use it.

So beware of off-by-one errors. You hear me talking about how I

love a for-loop,

and I hate to see a for-loop with something like that in it.

Less than or equal to, why would you do that?

You're just setting yourself up for failure,

unless there's a particular reason.

It looks like this person was trying to- I don't know what

they were doing.

But when I see code like that, my eye goes right to it and

says, there's got to be a reason there.

If there's not a really great comment next to that, I'm gonna

tell you to fix it There's some time a reason to do that Maybe I

only want to start at the second one and move through all the

rest of them

I don't know but unless it says I equals zero I is less than

size So here somebody else did something else tricky right? I

is less than or equal to size minus one How does that

different from I is less than size?

Doesn't it's the same so you should write that one in there

But here what they were trying to do is say well if I'm gonna

set I equal to I plus one I don't want to get all of them.

So I want to move back off the end

but this still ends up doing it wrong so just be careful on how

you write these things here we're gonna skip the first one

you get all the rest of them which is good but you can look

at that and say if I was trying to assign things in X this does

not get all of them this can only assign and minus one of

them so if that's what I want here and I do something else

outside of this loop I should definitely comment it and set it

up oftentimes I will just do the whole loop as I should and then

overwrite the one odd version if I want to.

So then I can look at the loop and be happy with it.

So just be aware when you see four loops that don't look good,

they're probably leading you to ruin.

There's also range-based four loops.

I think they're learning that now in 280,

right?

You're doing range-based four loops.

So those are a nice addition.

You can see here a couple of versions of it.

In this range-based four loop in line nine,

I can say give me this item as a reference to

integer.

So it doesn't make copies.

It just lets me reference it. So now any changes I make to

item actually get reflected back in the original array.

If I remove this ampersand here,

if I don't do this by reference, then I'll be doing it by value.

And as I truck through my array,

item will be a copy of the next item in my array.

And any modifications I do to it won't be translated back to my

array.

So this is how this version can be exactly like the version

above it.

You see, we're actually changing the thing in my array at square

brackets i in line 6. And if we want to change the

thing in my array with the range-based for loop, we have to

use the ampersand.

So you can do it either way, however you want to do it.

I will oftentimes, a lot too,

I would just auto this out.

Auto is quick and easy. Then if I do make any changes to

types later,

it still works just as well.

What happens is the compiler can say, well,

we're looking through my array. What is my array?

It looks back up in the code and sees that my array is an array

of integers.

So the auto can be inferred as the B type int.

So feel free to do that and you can use auto with or without the

ampersand just as well.

So that's range-based for loops.

They're great. The place that range-based for

loops don't work is when you really do need that index to do

something interesting with it, then you still have to go back

to the high-based for loops.

All right. So here's a piece of code.

It's got a couple of errors in it.

What do you see as errors?

May occur.

Yeah.

What if argv1 is longer,

right?

strcpy in line three takes everything from argv1 and copies

it into name.

Right, and since name is a C string, that's a str,

those str functions, those are all C library string functions.

So strcpy,

just,

you give it a place to start and a place to write,

and it just writes,

writes, writes, writes, writes, writes, writes, writes, writes,

writes, until it sees the null terminator,

and then it writes the null terminator.

So if my name happens to be 20 characters long,

or more,

it won't fit.

It says name holds 20, but this is a C string, so we know that

that really only holds 19 good characters and one null

terminator. So I can have an error here if

argv of one is longer than 19 characters.

What else?

Yeah.

What if argv of one doesn't exist, right? We don't know if,

that's why argc exists. to tell you where can I look.

I've looked where I don't know that I could.

So we can make this safer,

something like this.

Let's first make sure that argv of one is valid

by checking argc,

and then if I use a C++ string,

there's an overloaded operator equals that lets me set a C++

string equal to a char pointer and we'll copy all that

information in there. So then I get the buffer that's

the right size, bigger or smaller,

right? Because up there, if my name is only two characters, I'm

still leaving 18 characters of fresh data out there for

somebody to troll through. So this one does a better job of

keeping us clean in terms of memory and dynamic memory and

not running out of space.

String copy always ensures the last character in the array is

in one.

Yes,

so the question is string copy always,

well, it needs an LTerminator to stop, And so it's gonna set

itself up to be strcpy this, the strcpy that, strcpy that.

So it always does write, all of your string operations that

modify will always write a null terminator.

All your str operations.

And most of your string operations do too for that same

reason.

All right.

So assume that a given array has a majority of some element,

meaning more than 50% of the array is this one thing.

You can see it here in that line and there's nine values up

there.

Five of them are 99,

so more than half of them are 99.

The question is, can you in constant space and linear time

figure out what that item is?

It's non-trivial, it sounds pretty dang simple.

Linear time, so I gotta make a pass through it, maybe two.

Constant amount of memory, how do I keep track of which one is

the most important one?

Think about that one.

The next one is an extension of that one as well.

Same thing, now we have an array that has an element that repeats

more than n over three times,

so more than a third of the time.

In this next thing, it says do it in K memory.

Here in this case,

K is equal to three.

So the same thing would be also true if I could find something

that repeats more than

N over four times, I'd have to have a big O of four memory to

get this done.

So those are a couple of two tricky little thought problems.

So this one you can find as Moore's algorithm.

So,

think about it,

and go Wikipedia the thing,

right,

and this one is the misregrees algorithm.

Check those two out.

Think about them. See what you can come up with.

If you can think about it as you're going to sleep trying to

figure it out,

be good.

All right. If not,

or even if you do, go check out the answer and see what you

find.

Okay. So let's talk about some

containers here.

We know what a container is. It's just some object that helps

us contain other variables,

multiple data items and usually they're all the same type.

This is C++ after all. If you want some list to contain

all willy-nilly types,

then go walk your happy self over to Python.

Have some Python fun.

You can do that.

C++,

we like all our containers to hold the same damn things.

right?

They allow us protection and control over what's inside of

them.

What most people don't realize is when you say push back on a

vector,

that vector makes a copy of the thing that you just pushed back

so it has its own

version. It owns that memory.

So push back creates copies.

We can do aggregate operations on them like copying the whole

thing, editing them individually sorting,

things like that.

We can combine them.

Multiple containers together make more complicated things.

We've already seen a multiple container version in this map.

A container full of containers, a vector of vectors.

But a database is nothing more than a whole bunch of containers

all wrapped up together.

Database is a collection of tables, a table is a collection

of rows,

rows a collection of columns,

and yada, yada, yada. So containers are some stuff

that we're going to use quite often.

The ones we'll be looking at, vector, list,

stack,

queue,

deck, map,

of course,

avoid list during the semester.

We probably won't have to use the stack and queue too much

individually because we've got the map,

I'm sorry, the deck to do it.

We will be talking about map and unordered map in the second

half.

Those are some really cool structures

and everything we're pulling is gonna be out of the STL.

So most of the data structures in 281 one are gonna be

containers.

Today we're gonna be looking at array-based containers as an

illustration to figure out how can I do this sort of thing.

When I look at a container,

here's some of my basic operations.

I need to be able to create and destroy one.

I need to be able to add things or remove things from it.

Some of them allow me to get an element.

Some of them allow me to, well, I should always be able to check

the size. I mean, if I can't put something

in there and take something out,

it's not really that good a container, is it? It's just kind

of a dead end. So I've got most of these

operations on any container. They might behave differently

because getting an element in the stack is different from

getting an element in the queue, but they both have a method of

get.

Then it says what other operations might be useful and

that can vary from container to container.

So as we look at accessing containers, we've got two ways

to access them.

Of course,

we've got two ways to store things.

we talked about connected and contiguous,

and as we're going through that memory,

when it's connected,

I can do a sequential investigation.

Look at this thing, look at the thing next to it.

Look at the thing next to that, look at the thing next to that.

That's sequential access.

In containers that have sequential access only,

I can't jump into the middle of it.

I have to start at the beginning and next, next, next, next, next

until I get there.

I can still have non-contiguous or connected memory that has

only sequential access.

You should be thinking,

yeah, that's right. That's what a linked list is.

It's non-contiguous,

but it is sequential access only.

It's really easy to do sequential access on connected

things.

To get to random access, I have to be able to calculate ahead of

time where this information is gonna be.

So I'll see those a lot more when I've got contiguous memory.

Because in contiguous memory, I say it starts here, and if you

want the fifth one, I just have to multiply by the size of the

thing that I'm looking at, jump that far over,

constant time I get it.

So these are the ways that we access in sequential and random.

Random,

even though it sounds random, doesn't mean we're just picking

anything.

It means we have the ability to pick anything.

We're not asking for some random value back.

We're randomly asking for a value.

So this one is,

how do I copy from one array to another?

You might say, well, I know how to do that.

I've got this source array in line two, I've got a destination

array,

same size in line three, and then this nifty little for loop

in five, six,

looks great.

Read from source array at i,

write to destination array at i,

perfectly good copy.

Great.

Now we move down a little bit though, and I start using

pointers to do it, even though I said let's avoid pointers

whenever possible.

We're going to start with this as an example though.

So if I take this source pointer and set it equal to the base

address of the source array,

that's what you see in lines eight and nine is the

destination pointer on the destination array.

So now I've got these two pointers that point to the

beginning of the data in those two arrays.

Then look at the loop that I've used here in lines 11 and 12 to

do the actual copying,

right? The copying says let's dereference the source pointer.

It's on the right hand side of the equal sign.

So we're dereferencing the source pointer for a chance to

read something.

And over here on the left hand side of the equal sign, that's a

L value, I'm gonna say let's dereference the destination

pointer for the purpose of writing.

The equal sign does the work. whatever was that source pointer

is now a destination pointer.

Then both of these things have post increments.

So after we're done dealing with them,

those pointers move forward in their respective containers.

You see that's just going to write this first thing, move

over, write the second thing,

write the third thing, and so on.

So it's doing what the for loop above was doing.

But then what about the control on this loop? This is a while

loop now. It's not a for loop anymore.

say the source pointer that's an address

as long as it's not equal to the base address of the source array

plus size that's the first thing past good memory right because

if there's four things they're numbered zero one two three if I

look at four I'm out of bounds so this one says as long as I'm

not up to four,

I'm in the good copy area and do this thing here.

So it's like,

this does exactly what that one does.

They do exactly the same thing. So the first one obviously looks

a lot better.

It's got all the sugar that we like in there.

For loops are pretty sugary,

right?

Square brackets are definitely sugary.

So why not go with the beautiful one?

Well, it turns out that we can do some pretty cool stuff with

this and we'll learn how the STL uses this type of approach to

say,

if I don't restrict myself to being only able to use square

brackets.

So you can see for sure

that that five, six code is not going to work on a linked list.

It'll work on an array, but it won't work on a linked list.

What about this?

This code would work on a linked list if, when I say plus plus, I

know that that means next,

right? If I say dereference allows me to read and write, and

I can compare to where I should be.

So this is a more generic way of doing it, and we'll see that

more in a minute.

So let's look at what goes on in our containers.

we've got a few options when we put things into a container.

We can put things in there by value,

we can put things in there by pointer,

we can put things in there by reference.

References and pointers are pretty close to one another, but

you can't assign to a reference later.

I can set in a reference up when I declare a reference variable.

This also happens when I turn a reference into a parameter.

It's like let's put that thing on there now, but I can't later

on and say, well, I've got this int reference.

I want it to be an int reference to j now.

So pointers have more flexibility because I can always

redirect a pointer.

It's harder to redirect a reference.

So when I put stuff into a container, I say if I put it in

there by value,

who owns it?

Only the container owns it. That's great.

If I put a pointer in there,

I mean,

the container has the pointer, but who knows what's at the

other end of it?

Anybody who has a copy of that pointer You can just say,

delete it,

and it goes away.

So the container can't be sure that what's in there is actually

valid if you give it pointers, which is a reason to not try to

store a whole bunch of pointers.

Or unless you've got a real need for a dual purpose,

I need to have access to these things over here, and I also

need to have another container that points at them as well.

And I know that my primary access is going to be

responsible for memory management,

allocating, deallocating, who owns it.

And my secondary one with the pointers,

that one isn't going to be responsible for things.

And so we don't try to do this a whole lot because we don't need

it in every situation.

We're much more likely to say,

hey, I really want my container to run the show.

I put some stuff in there, it's in there.

When it comes out, I want it to be gone.

If I've got just a pointer in a container to some stuff and I

say, okay, let's get rid of that pointer, I take it out of the

container, and it's gone.

That's great.

The memory, however, is still allocated.

And unless I'm doing some garbage collection later or

doing some other memory management, it adds the multiple

steps in there. So that's why I said it's a

little unsafe to put pointers in containers because you never

know what's gonna happen

outside of the container.

And the reason why we don't do references is you can't really

assign to a bunch of references.

So the most common thing that we put into a container is by

value, because that does allow the container to control it,

own it,

be responsible for making and destroying it, and that's how we

like things to go.

When we ask a container for,

give me what's in your container, how do we do that? If

we do it by value, then we're doing copies every time.

What's in your array at this location? It's this four, so now

I've got a copy of the four and that four.

If I end up changing this,

it hasn't changed this thing.

So by value is a bit rarer, it's costly for objects.

By pointers,

that's another thing that could be kind of icky,

right? So if the container owns the thing and you ask me for

something in the container and the container gives you back a

pointer to that thing inside the container,

Sometimes it works,

sometimes it doesn't though,

right?

So imagine you had a vector and somebody says, let me get square

brackets 10 on the vector.

You say, okay, well, here's a pointer to the thing that's at

10.

Then I write that down because I'm going to come back to that

thing that's at 10 later.

I wanted to know who was the 10th most blah, blah, blah,

blah.

Great.

Then some more data gets pushed into the container.

Push back,

push back, push back oh wait we're out of space what does the

vector do vector packs up and leaves right the vector says let

me go get twice as much memory copy my old stuff into their new

stuff and then we'll keep going from there and where is that

pointer to 10 now pointing it's pointing to the old number

10

which could no longer be valid so that's why we don't want to

give pointers away to things inside our container unless we

know for sure that the container is not going to move or redo

things.

So the more common way to do it is with the reference.

When you ask for it I can give you a reference and that

reference isn't going to change.

So as we look at our design on containers that's how we deal

with it. This is an example of how memory

ownership works.

If I've got this block of rainbow colored dots here and

I've got a couple of pointers to it,

a couple of separate names. Maybe I might call it array A in

one function and call it array B in some other function.

And they're both pointing back at that thing.

What happens when it's time to go away? If I modify A,

do I realize that's modifying it for B?

And every once in a while, you might come up with an

application where you would wanna do this.

I wanna have one container and two different people that are

able to modify it separately without passing it back.

You don't do that too often though.

Because then, you know,

whose turn is it to get rid of it?

Is array A gonna go out of scope and then call delete on its

pointer?

If it does, what happens when array B goes out of scope?

Does it call delete?

If it does,

we could have some problems there.

We double delete,

that's gonna cause a crash pretty quick.

So we wanna know who owns the memory

and that's why it's pretty good to keep this stuff clear and

separate.

When we do construction,

every time I do copy construction,

we have to make duplicate objects.

By default, the operating system is going to give me a pure

member copy.

So I say something has dynamic memory in it,

and then I make a copy of that object.

The second object has a pointer to the same location.

I got a previous slide.

That's why we write our own copy constructors.

so that we're sure that we get our own memory.

Go ahead.

The data structure is shared across threads.

How does it feel to be able to,

how does it feel when I can use the thread?

The data structure is shared across threads.

How do we know when to instruct it?

Well,

that's one of those multi-threaded programming

skills, just trying to figure out when that does.

Because somebody does ultimately have to own it.

Some thread you would think would be in charge of it.

Or you can do it with reference counting as well.

That's another way that's done.

So in reference counting,

you say, well, I'm gonna get some memory and no one's gonna

own it.

And I'm gonna pass the pointer off to you.

And I keep a separate count. It says, well, one person has a

pointer to this.

Right, and then you ask for it. I say, okay,

I'm gonna pass the pointer off to you.

Now you both have pointers to it.

I upgrade that count so now two people have pointers on there.

So then when you say, okay, I'm done with it, you sort of throw

my pointer away. Great,

now you say, well, I'm gonna decrement that.

Now there's only one person there.

So I can't get rid of it yet.

Somebody's still counting on that memory.

And then when you throw it away,

say, okay, well,

now there's nobody that's referencing that memory, it's a

good time to go clean that up.

So that's another way that that gets done through reference

counting.

That's a process that's normally called garbage collection,

that's how Java does their stuff.

Garbage collection, that's how smart pointers also work in C++,

but they're not common, but that's what's going on there.

Reference counts.

All right,

so objects could be owned by some other container.

The destructor may need to delete each object.

So what we really wanna do is just be aware of where the

memory's going, who's got it.

The autograder has the memory check on there.

In project one,

there's almost no reason why you would have a memory leak.

You shouldn't do any news or deletes in project one.

Rare that we have the project that even has news or deletes in

it.

So when you run into memory issues in project one,

it is because there are usually a set of two or three tests that

you have to pass before the autograder will run memory

checking. So if you're still failing a

bunch of tests and you happen to fail one of the tests that the

autograder wants you to be able to pass so it doesn't get broken

into a memory checking hell,

then it won't do your memory checking.

So if you're ever stuck getting zero out of 10 memory

checkpoints,

it might not be because you're having a leak.

It might just be because the autogrider has deemed it unsafe

to run Valgrind,

which is a separate thing.

Later on, when we do get into things that might have some new,

then you have a chance of really leaking memory, but it's about

making sure that you're not doing bad things in memory.

One of these things that you can fix that with is,

after you do a delete of some pointer,

if you set that pointer equal to null pointer,

this is a safety thing here. Because later on,

if I delete a pointer

and then try to delete that pointer again,

that's when I get a double delete error,

and it will crash my program.

But if I delete the pointer and set it equal to null pointer

then I tried to delete a null pointer okay that's fine I know

you really didn't want to do anything bad so if you do delete

and then set it equal to null pointer instead of just plain

deleting it you'll get some security there if you end up

doing something where you double delete things because delete no

pointer doesn't do a thing because

people don't want you doing stuff for them, right?

Like when it could take time, you think, well, I gotta delete

50,000 of these things, and I know that I'm gonna do the right

thing afterwards.

I don't want you deleting 50,000 things and doing 50,000

additional assignments for me just to set something equal to

null pointer.

So that's really what it is. And that's pretty common with

all of the way that C works, right?

You say you wanted 50 bytes. Okay, I give you 50 bytes.

Well, did you clean those bytes for me? No,

because most people don't want me to clean the bytes for them.

They just want to be able to stick stuff in there.

And so it goes for speed by not doing things that you don't

explicitly request.

So that's why delete doesn't explicitly replace them with

null pointers.

So that whole C fills.

All right, so when we finish the end of a program, you should

have deallocated all of your memory.

However,

the system will fix that for you,

right? The system already has specced out the memory your

program is going to use while it executes,

and then when it goes and terminates,

it gets all of that stuff back.

We still want to make mistakes along the way.

One of the things that Windows used to do back in the old bad

days,

if you worked in a machine that had Windows 3.1

on it, like two or three times a day, you just had to reboot.

You just had to reboot the whole machine because the dynamic

library system

was just prone to leaking, and you would use your machine for

half a day, and then you'd have leaked so much memory every time

it went to go get new memory,

that I can't find it, I can't find it, I can't find it,

there's no money, I can't get it, I can't get it, and it would

take longer and longer to find where you could get that and get

to eventually one of the point where it would go out to get

memory

and never come back,

right? Because I can't find it and I can't stop looking,

and that's when a lot of the old Windows crashes came up.

So that's from memory leaks.

If your code is leaking just a little bit, that's sometimes

okay. But if your code is leaking a

little bit,

and if it leaks just a little bit,

the system will recover that memory when your program

terminates.

But if it leaks just a little bit and then loops a million

times,

that's more than a little bit. So we're trying to make sure

that you're not going to leak here.

This is what Valgrind will help you do here.

Use Valgrind on your program. It does,

Diorio just talked to me the other day, he's like, you guys

are still using Valgrind? How come you're not using the

address sanitizer?

We do use the address sanitizer.

But the address sanitizer and Valgrind

have an overlap somewhere around 80% or maybe more, who knows,

there's some things that happen dynamically that the address

sanitizer just can't pick up.

That Valgrind does.

So the builds that you have are automatically,

the debug builds automatically use the address sanitizer.

If you want to use Valgrind,

remember you have to type make valgrind and then you would

have some executable like hunt underscore Valgrind.

This one would work with a Valgrind profiler memchecker.

Hunt Valgrind will work there because the standard hunt

underscore debug uses the address sanitizer flags and

Valgrind and address sanitizer flags don't get So if you want

to use Valgrind,

do a make Valgrind or if you type make all,

it will build a Valgrind build for you,

and then you use that one here where you would say dot program

underscore Valgrind.

All right.

Great.

All right. Let's get into this bounce

checking array here.

I talked already about new and new square brackets.

I said earlier that new calls the default constructor to

create an object.

If I call new square brackets, it's going to give me an array

of them,

and also call the default constructor on each one of them.

Delete will call the destructor to get rid of an object,

and delete square brackets will take an entire array and call

the destructor on each one of them in turn and then release

that memory.

You just have to use them in pair, delete gets called when I

call new, delete square brackets gets called when I call delete

new square brackets.

Here we are now.

We're going to add this array with bounds checking.

And so this one is always in danger of me turning it into a

larger assignment.

I want you to do some more stuff like vector.

This is kind of like a vector.

This is a really cheap vector because it behaves like a vector

and it's got memory that's on the heap and not in the stack.

So we see we've got this class array up here and it's got a

member that lets us know how many items are in there, call

that length.

Then it's also got a pointer to, in this case, just doubles.

So you could make this one templated if you wanted to hold

other things.

It'll be some different amount of work there.

If you wanted to make one for integers,

you could do that separately as well.

But for the purposes of the slides,

it's just simple enough to use doubles only.

That's all I need. Those are my two private

variables.

Then I've got some public functions.

You see I've got a default constructor there.

No, that's not a default constructor.

I don't have a default constructor.

There's no need for default constructor.

Default constructor isn't going to help me here because it's

going to set my length to zero,

and then my data is a null pointer,

and this control doesn't have the ability to change its size

later at runtime, only at declaration time.

So no default constructor, but you will see that these two

things are written here, so even if I was to call one by default,

those two things would be initialized.

This is a really good way to write your structs.

Hopefully that you're doing this in P1.

Your tile could have the terrain always set to water

and the direction always set to never been here before.

Then if you make a map of 2D of them,

your map's already ready to go.

So use this static initialization whenever you can.

with simple members,

definitely do that.

All right.

We do have a custom constructor in line six, that says give me a

length and I will set that as something I remember as my

personal length and go get that many doubles.

You see there in this is called an initialization list.

It's after the constructor parenthesis and a colon,

but before the curly braces.

So there's no real code in there, but the initialization

sets length,

and then it also sets the data to be something that's good.

Good?

Yeah.

Is that static initialization equivalent to using a member

initialization list?

This question is the static initialization equivalent to

using a member initialization list.

So if you wanted to be like write your own default

constructor,

and have those things in a list,

it would work about the same, yeah.

It's not going to be more or less work there.

So in this case,

I'm going to use these for almost all my default

constructors.

Unless I've got to do something special like go and allocate

some memory at default construction time,

do that.

All right. So there's our constructor in

six.

We see our destructor in eight.

It's got the tilde,

it's got the class name with parentheses after it and no

arguments. That is a destructor.

There's no return type,

it's a destructor. So the only thing that I really

have to do is clean up any new or new score brackets that I've

done, and since I've got a new score brackets in the

constructor,

I'm going to put a delete score brackets in the destructor.

After that, I set the data equal to null pointer just for safety

sake,

and that's the destructor.

Lastly, I've got a nifty little getter here that says, what's

the size of this thing,

and I just return that length member, and we're good to go.

All right.

There's our structure.

Let's peek into this a little bit more.

We're going to try to turn this into array,

then when I come to access it, if I'm out of bounds,

it's going to let me know rather than let me crash.

Get this question all the time, should I use this as a class or

struct?

What's the difference?

From a compiled standpoint,

there's no difference.

Code that you compile with a class is exact same as the code

that you compile with a struct. From an access point, however,

classes hide their data by default.

So everything that I declare right up there at the top in

lines two or three,

those are private member variables.

If this was a struct,

those would both be public member variables.

So what this does is if I declare myself an array,

I can't say array.length or access array.data.

They're private. So that's the only difference

between structs and classes.

Physically,

you can make parts of a struct public.

Well, you don't need to. They're all public by default.

But you can make parts of a struct private,

just like you can make parts of a class public.

So if you really want to use one, you can always use one.

But since the beginning of C++,

structs already existed before C++ came about.

Structs lived in C,

and that's where you put aggregate data together, and it

was a data-only thing.

Classes came along and said, well, we want data and

functions, so we're going to be able to put a function inside

there.

So that's why when we use types that we build our own

custom types,

if we use them as data only,

the tradition is to use a struct.

If we wanted to have some methods to do some work on its

own,

that's what we would jump in there and turn it into a class

by tradition. There's no reason to do

otherwise.

You don't want people to look at you all sideways and stuff if

you're doing crazy stuff

like all these member functions inside a struct.

I mean, it works, but why would you do that?

Give you the eyes, you see what I'm saying?

You got all of these functions inside a struct.

People don't understand why.

Same thing too, is you've got a whole class and all you ever do

is make every variable in that class public and then dot those

things. People are like, well, why would

you put that in a class?

You should just use a struct. They still give you an object

either way, but that's what we should do.

So, here's the copy constructor.

Look at this copy constructor here.

We know it's a copy constructor because it is a function with no

return type.

The function name is the same as the class array.

This is line two here.

And then I know it's a copy constructor because I'm passing

in a const reference to something of this same type.

You see, const reference array,

So now to do the deep copy,

which is important here,

because even without writing this copy constructor,

I get what's known as a shallow copy.

The shallow copy just does a member by member assignment.

So the second one's length is the same as the first one's

length,

but the problematical part is the second one's pointer is

pointing at the exact same place as the first one's pointer.

Well, it's got this thing going on in memory.

this one changes it this one feels it so the deep copy says

well if you've got your memory over here I'm gonna go make my

own copy of the memory over there and so that's what goes on

here we set our length as you might imagine and go get the

data for it now we've got our own separate data separate from

a and all we need to do is get a copy of everything that a has in

it into ours and that's what this nice little for loop does

here run through zero to length and set what's in my data,

data at i,

equal to a's data at i.

So that's a deep copy,

and this is what you need to do when you've got dynamic memory

here.

Once I've gotten this far into it,

you see I can do all of these things here.

I can say give me an array a of size 10.

That just uses my simple custom constructor.

Array b uses my custom constructor as well.

Array C,

this one uses a copy constructor,

right?

It says I'm declaring C and I'm creating it from B.

You can also put those in curly braces.

That's the more common way to do it in C++ now.

A, curly braces there.

That one works fine.

And then this one down here,

array D is equal to B. You might say, well, that looks

like an assignment.

And you'd be almost right,

because the compiler says, well, if you're doing an assignment at

declaration time,

what you're really trying to do is a copy construction.

So compiler jumps in with a bag of sugar, like, OK, I know what

you did.

Well, here's what you really meant,

right? So these two things are equivalent.

This one calls the copy constructor.

It does not do operator equals. It does not do assignment,

even though it It looks like it does.

And then lastly,

this one is where I have a problem,

because this is me actually doing an operator equals.

So this is just gonna set length equal to length,

my pointer equal to your pointer.

And so now A and C have the exact same data.

When it comes time to destruct both of them,

one of them's gonna get by and the other one's gonna cause us a

crash.

So, we'll fix that next.

This just talks about the complexity of copying.

You can see it all there in counted steps.

I do length,

that's one step.

I go and allocate memory for data, that's one step.

Then I've got this for loop that goes n times to put a constant

amount of work into copying things from a to data.

So in the best case, worst case, and average case, this is always

linear.

One other thing that I want to point out here is that the order

of this initialization list is important.

You see here I've got length comma data.

It has to be done in that order because they were declared in

this order.

So I declared length in line two, I declared data in line

three. If I try to change the order of

these two things,

the compiler will give me a nasty message and not compile.

You don't have to fill every single one in your constructor,

but if you do fill them in the initialization list, they have

to be done in the order. So it's always a good idea in

your constructor or by the end of your constructor to have

initialized all of the memory.

So you can either do that with static initialization,

or stuff in the initialization list,

or statements inside the body of the constructor,

or some combination of all three of those things.

But what you should be doing is making sure that when you create

a new object of your own that everything gets initialized one

way or the other,

either static initialization list or actual lines of code in

the constructors.

Really good and will keep you from having

horrendous crashes later that are really difficult to track

down.

All right.

So let's talk about now

operator equals

Said we needed that earlier

So we can think about how is operator equals gonna work right

operator equals needs to make sure that there's enough memory

there Then it's gonna copy all that stuff over there Say well,

wait a minute Isn't that what the copy constructor did the

copy constructor made sure there's enough memory there and

they copied all the things over there So rather than write that

code twice, which I don't ever want to do I never want to write

code twice if I don't have to write that comes from a really A

solid coding principle is called dry coding

because in dry coding,

you don't repeat yourself.

So you say, okay, well, then I can write this one copy from

function.

You see it there in lines one through nine.

What does it do?

It gets rid of the old stuff,

gets me enough memory for the new stuff,

sets my length, and then loops through and copies things over.

That's great. I can use that function, you see

it here,

I just call that function all by itself

in the copy constructor.

And with a little bit of work here in operator equals,

I'm gonna call that function as well.

As long as I'm not setting myself equal to myself,

then I'm gonna do this copy from and then return dereference

this.

So this is an okay way to do it.

The problem with this one is it has that, what we call the idiot

check in there,

right? See that there in line 16 if the thing that I'm setting

myself equal to is not already me because who sets a equal to a

idiots, right, but

Just being an idiot shouldn't make things broken.

So if you set a equal to a you would expect that

It'd be equal to a

If I didn't have the idiot check if I just said hey when they do

operator equals copy from other What happens we jump up with

this and other?

Being the same thing

Into line one there the first thing I do

Delete all my data

So now this has no data other has no data

Because they're the same.

I say, okay, well now set my length the other's length, okay

I think it's 10 and then I give myself a new 10 set of doubles

and I say well Let me copy what's in the one to the other

and all that does is whatever new 10 I got

it

Copies them over each other. So here was the original 10 So

we're just gonna delete those and then make our new stuff

there So now A equals to A has completely trashed your data.

That's why the idiot check is there.

But then you say, well, I'm not an idiot.

I would never set A equal to A.

I don't wanna spend the time doing this dumb check every

single time I do an operation as operator equal.

I gotta do an idiot check.

I don't want that.

So we'll get to a better version of copying this.

Here it is.

Those astute viewers will look back at lines three through

eight and say, hey, that's just our original copy constructor.

It's what it is, it's the original copy constructor.

So this best copying is known as the copy swap method

because when it comes time to set our two things equal, that's

where the operator equals kicks into line 10 there See the first

thing we do is we make a copy.

We call it temp with a copy constructor.

We make a copy of other

So now I've got this local

Thing that is a copy and I've got my original which is this

and I've got other

Then in lines 14 and 15 I just swap the relevant variables from

temp

into this

Which it does right standard swap

This is my length.

This is my data I swapped that with temps length and temps data

now what happens temp was a full copy of other So now I have a

full copy of other and what does temp have temp has everything I

had

So then when I get to the end of this function what happens temp

goes out of scope

So temp gets destructed so temp cleans up my old

mess

So now if you want to do something silly like set a equal

to a

You can go make a copy of the data throw away a copy and then

use the new copy and Idiots pay for all of the dumb behavior and

the smart folks

They never get charged

Great.

All right, so let me show you how that looks here.

So here's my object coming in, right? Let's say I've got this

and I've already got some stuff in here, like I've got my own

four doubles.

That's five,

not a double.

All right,

and then here's other that comes along.

I wanna set this equal to other, and what's this got? This has

got 10 of these things and it's got a pointer and

there we go there's 10 of them.

When I set this equal to other

I am perfectly happy with all of this going away.

I just want to make sure that I've got 10 and I've got my own

copy of those 10.

So how do I do that?

Well,

as I said before, I'll start out with temp and make a full copy

of others. So I come up with temp,

and since temp uses the copy constructor,

temp gets a 10,

temp gets its own vector,

and then we copy all of the things in there.

So now temp and other are exactly equivalent,

they're just in their own separate memory.

That's the copy step. Now, the swap step says,

let's exchange things between this, because I'm setting this,

and temp.

So I'll say, well, let's make this 10 and this four,

and I'll take this pointer and point at this data, and take

temp pointer and point at that data,

and these go away,

and now you see it. It's a little bit rough,

but it's there.

If you look at this,

what's the size on this?

10.

Is this pointing to 10 things? Yes, and they are a copy of the

original other.

Now when I go out of scope,

temp goes away. So what does temp's destructor

do?

Temp says, well, go to this blue pointer there and delete those

things.

And so my original four things go away.

Yeah.

like the same as an avocado,

the same.

Standard swap is what you should use because standard swap is a

little bit smarter than your average set some stuff equal,

right?

Standard swap will look at what needs to be done.

So if I call standard swap on two vectors,

they say, hey, do those two vectors have a swap method?

It turns out they do, so instead of doing standard swap work, I'm

gonna forward it on to vector swap and vector swap says well,

we don't really need to do anything with memory We don't

need to set your vector here into a temp And then overwrite

your vector and then overwrite the temp back into my vector

the vector swap says well, we got to do is just

That pointer thing and we're good, right? And so standard

swap doesn't always do a mem copy It'll do that if that's the

best it can do

but if there's better things they can do a little better

things

right

well

the The idiot check ends up being slower because now

everyone has to pay the price for checking

to make sure the idiot hasn't shot us in the foot,

right? So this one's faster because it always does exactly

the amount of work that's needed.

It always does exactly the same amount of work as requested.

And the people who didn't need to do more work

but ask for it anyways, they still get it.

Whereas if you weren't asking for extra work, you don't get

extra work.

Yeah,

it's one conditional.

It is a check that I don't need to do.

If I'm sitting there, I'm going to copy 10 million data records

in a day,

there's 10 million extra calls that I don't need to make.

But if you do the self-assignment,

now instead of that just being a constant condition,

you have to do this linear talking.

No,

there's no,

well,

in the situation where you're setting yourself equal to

yourself, that's something that you don't need to do anyway.

So if you're avoiding that altogether, then when you do an

assignment, you do have to do some work,

right? The only time you would not have to do any work is when

you're assigning yourself to yourself.

And that's not the kind of code that we wanna be writing in

general.

Yeah,

all right,

yeah.

Other is the original, yeah. Yeah, so if you look here,

that's what we're sending in.

When I call it on the operator equals,

it's using other.

Temp is the copy of other,

right? Because I had to get the data from other,

right? There's some other methods that you can add as well

to this.

That gets into some deeper C++ stuff.

We can start using some move operators, but we don't teach it

in this course. If you want to learn about it,

you can go learn about it.

The move operator just basically says,

if you're getting ready to get rid of this thing,

why would you get rid of it if I'm trying to make a copy of it?

Let's just trade.

So we can do this without even a full copy in those situations.

This is what happens if you return a vector, for instance.

You have some function that returns a vector because you

built the vector inside of that function and then you return it,

it was on the stack and it's going to go away.

But if you're setting that equal to something else and use the

move operator,

you say, okay, well, I'm not going to assign myself to a full

copy of all your data.

When you're just getting ready to throw it away,

I'm just going to throw mine away and then use yours and not

have to do any of that work.

So that's, like I said, something we don't cover in

here. But if you're interested in how

move and swap work, there's a whole separate collection

of them, right? So we think of the big three as the destructor,

the copy constructor and operator equals.

When I use dynamic memory,

I have to declare all of those myself because the default

version doesn't cover dynamic memory.

Now in C++ with the move operators,

we've got copy constructor from our value and overloaded

operator equals from our value and that's what I'm talking

about using move because the data are going away.

Let's just not let them go away and use them instead.

So we don't talk about it,

but it's there.

We're talking about our values here.

So this is a function that I mentioned, is building a string,

a vector of strings inside of it.

And then it returns that vector.

So this looks like you're passing things by value and it's

not a thing that you want to do.

It looks like it. But what you don't want to have

is the objects by value in the parameter list.

If the object is used by value in the return,

that's fine, because this statement right here,

as I mentioned,

says, hey, wait, we're going to set this vector equal to

something that's coming back that's about to be thrown away?

The compiler can see that this return value from readData is

going away. It doesn't live anymore once

readData stack frame is gone. The compiler says okay.

Well rather than making a new

Copy of that. I'll just grab the stuff from

read data. I'll just grab its

Data pointer, I'll grab its pointer and call it good

Um you do have to specify it I think with

With this particular syntax here this syntax the compiler does

know this one because it's actually written into vector so

So it has to be done by the compiler, but this one's got it

written already, because this operator has the, and it's

called, it's a double ampersand, so when you look at it,

I think I got a copy of it, do I have a copy over here? I don't

have a copy, oh, there it is right there.

See?

That really strange look right there.

And those are the things that allow me to do that.

All right.

We got this array class, we still can't get anything out of

it. So let's get to this operator

square brackets.

You can see a couple of operators that we add up there.

Operator square brackets give me a reference to the double that

I'm asking for by i. This is where we have the chance

to do our bounds checking.

If i is greater than or equal to length, then I'm out of bounds.

Otherwise,

I'm good there. So you see,

as long as i is less than length, I can return that data.

Otherwise,

I can throw an error

and catch that thing without having it crash.

So this is what we're trying to put bounce checking on array in

the first place.

So we needed the square brackets,

and this is gonna make it happen.

On the left, you see the non-const version,

or the regular version.

On the right,

you see the const version.

And so in the const version, we say we're going to return a

reference to double, but it's going to be a const reference,

meaning that when you get it back, you cannot change that

value.

As well, we mark this as a const member function,

which is saying when I call this function,

it will in no way change what's going on inside the object.

So those two consts are used to make that const version.

Now the same, the body of the function is exactly the same.

A little bit lower, more text space, but the same thing, yeah.

Are you doing non-constant version or is there a problem

with the non-constant version?

No, if you try to compile something that is asking for a

const version, you cannot pass it the non-const version.

That's where the problem will be,

right? You can go the other route.

You could maybe,

if there was only a const version, you could possibly pass

that around, but then if you tried to assign to it, then you

would have problems.

So you see here,

this allows us to do some stuff, right?

Here, I'm assigning to that square brackets.

So if this is a const reference,

when I try to set it equal to something new,

fail is going to happen. So this uses the non-const

version,

same as this uses the non-const version.

Here,

this one also, a square brackets too is using the non-const

version because I'm changing it. But in these two, you see that a

sub zero and a sub one, I'm just reading from them.

So I could use the non-cons version there and be perfectly

okay.

It's compiler's job, so don't get too stressed about how do I

know when to use the right one. Just make them available,

the compiler will use the appropriate one.

So here we can use the const version for both a zero and a

one accesses to read from them, and then the non-cons version to

make a change to what's at two and A.

All right.

So now this const operator,

it's read-only access.

The compiler enforces this, and we're good to go.

Automatically selected by the compiler, and that const allows

the compiler to optimize for speed, or at least helps it to

optimize for speed.

Say, why would I need it, though?

Look at this function here.

This is a standard sort of how do I print things.

So somebody has overloaded the stream insertion operator print.

Let's say well if I give it some output stream like cout and some

array,

what does it do? It loops through the entire array and

sends each item out.

Great.

If I only had a non-const square brackets operator

this would not compile because this is passed in as const

reference to a so no matter what I do inside here I can't change

a if this is a non-const version

this const guarantee can't be upheld so this won't compile so

for something like this I have to have both why would you not

make it const well why would you have your print function change

your data structure?

You wouldn't. Right, exactly.

So and you wouldn't want anyone to either.

So that's the kind of thing that you put in to your function

contract. It's pretty common for all of

your stream insertion operators to expect const operations

because they're not trying to change anything, they're just

trying to print it.

When the compiler knows that it has to put in caches and various

caches and things like that in terms of,

what am I going to have to modify?

Can I just keep this here and throw it away or do I have to

worry about if I've made changes to this, I have to make sure

that gets committed back to more longer-term storage and so.

All right. So that's what's going on,

and I've lost my ability to swipe.

There we go.

How about insertion?

This one's pretty straightforward.

It's not a whole lot of work. This one does a for loop that I

don't love though.

Look at that for loop.

It's a negative for loop.

Starting at the end.

But that's really just because what I wanna do when I'm

inserting something, so this says insert at location two,

3.4. So I'm gonna put a 3.4

right there.

And push everything else out.

This insertion doesn't grow the thing, it's not that smart.

So, if I do this insertion, 8.4 is going to go away.

Now, if I do a positive for loop,

I say, well, let me write at this place where 4.2

is, and then I'll write at the place after it.

So, in order for me to write where the 4.2

is,

I've got to put 4.2 in some temp,

then I can put 3.4 there,

and now I've got to put 4.2 down, but I've got to put 5.9

in some other temp, So I can put that in there, and I got a 7.3

here and a 5.9 there,

and then if I go with a push mechanism,

move towards the end. If I go with a pull mechanism,

though,

you see how it goes pretty easily,

I can just come through and say,

as I go to insert that, what if I just write 7.3

over 8.4?

Write 5.9 over 7.3,

write 4.2 over 7.9,

and now I've got two 4.2s in there, but I can just write

3.4 right there, and I've gotten it

done. So you see,

every arrow that I draw here is an assignment,

and before I was saying,

write to temp,

put in data.

Write to temp,

put in data.

Write to temp,

put in data. And it looked like a bad 70s

dance movie, but there's twice as many writes going on there.

So this is faster when I go from the right-hand side by doing the

pull there. So that's why the minus is in

there, but this is a pretty good way to do it, and it does it in

as fast as possible time in linear time there.

Woo,

look at me, I'm over time again.

But I think I got the wrap here.

So I think after this, it just talks about the complexity of

it. Best case at the end,

no additional work, constant time.

Worst case at the beginning, average case,

also somewhere in the middle is about linear time.

That's the bounce checking array,

and that gets us to the study questions and lunch.

All right,

have a good one. We'll see you in the after.

Hey.

I'm wondering how atomic integers work on the CPU.

It's just like in hardware two,

and like a protected register that is outside any individual

thread.

In what,

give me some more context on what you're talking about here.

Like atomic integers,

that can be,

that can have globally mutable state across threads and not

interfere,

yeah.

Boy, that's some high-end stuff right there.

It's a special instruction.

Right, right, right.

Yeah,

and so that's an instruction there that

has to do with working in parallel with multiple

threads, right?

So how do they work in terms of the hardware?

Yeah, I don't know where it gets beyond how to get too deep in

the actual I mean the actual hardware