All right,
let's do it.
Where did we leave off here? We left off talking about heaps.
So this is kind of crucial to what's going on in this
project to be,
as we deal with,
priority queues that are heap-based.
So we left with this heap here, and we looked at it and said,
the most important item is at the top.
In the case of a max heap, we think of the most important item
as the largest item.
And you look at it there,
81 is bigger than anything. And then we look at the rest of
the tree and we see that the heap ordering principle holds is
that no item is more important than its parent.
If that's the case,
the root must be the most important item.
But you can see that different items can be more important than
other items, but as long as they're not more important than
their parent here,
one is higher up the tree than two and four,
but one is still not more important than its parent.
So you can imagine a much more skewed version of this tree
with putting different things in different orders, so there's not
one particular heap ordering that exists.
There's multiple heap orderings as long as we don't violate that
principle.
Here is the physical version of that.
If we look at how a heap gets stored in contiguous memory,
if we look at the first item in index one here, it makes our
math easy. We multiply two to get the left
child,
multiply by two plus one to get the right child,
or divide by two to get the parent.
So this thing logically looks like this on the left.
Physically,
it's gonna look like this in memory.
And if you look at it, remember I said,
it's not going to look sorted.
It's gonna look sorted-ish.
If it were sorted,
it would still be heap ordered. It'd be more ordering than
necessary to get to a heap, right? Because if this was
sorted in reverse order,
we'd have 81, 18,
14,
9, 7,
5,
4,
2, 1.
And that would just require us to sort of move things around
like this, right?
This is a 5,
4,
2, 1. That's what it would look like
if we reverse sorted it.
You can see that, too, is heap ordered.
That's a more restrictive order than we have to get to.
So heap ordering looks like that and this is where we pull in all
of the things that we've talked about with heaps so far.
We take arrays or trees that's connected or contiguous memory
to make heaps.
Once we have heaps,
we can build priority queues out of heaps.
We can also use a heap as a tool for a type of sort known as heap
sort.
we talked about max heap that's the one where the most important
item is the largest item or a min heap that's one where the
most important item is the smallest item
one of the things that also is good in the STL
the STL uses less than to get to a max heap and it uses greater
than to get to a min
that's what the comparator looks like it has to respond like if
the thing on the left is less than the thing on the right and
you return true you will get a max heap or if you make it
behave like the thing on the left is more important than the
right it's greater than the right and we return true then we
will get a min heap.
Come back.
All right.
So there we go. There's the basics on our heaps.
Now let's get to modifying this heap because it's great when we
have one,
but no use of keeping them static.
We need to do stuff with them.
So in There we go So here I've got this heap the same heap
We've already been looking at so in this case what I'm gonna.
Do is. I'm gonna increase the key at
heap 8 right That's this 2 here. I'm gonna check change it from a
2 to a 35 You can see it in the logical version and the physical
version now. I've definitely got a broken
heap 35 is more important than its parent 9
So how do I fix this I'm gonna use this behavior known as fix
up
Great,
I got a problem and I fix it up the tree.
So all I have to do is look at its parent and see, hey, what's
going on there?
I'm more important than my parent.
What have I just swapped with my parent?
Now everything from me down is a perfectly good heap.
I may or may not have fixed everything totally though.
So let's look up again.
Here we see that 35 is still more important than its parent.
So I've got a problem there.
Perfectly good place to swap those things.
and once I do,
now I have restored my heap.
So no matter where I put this thing, you saw that I put at the
very bottom, the lowest level I could get to,
I could have possibly done one more swap
if it wasn't 81 at the top.
That would have been like a 25,
I would still have to swap 35 up to the top.
That make sense?
But I know that in a fix, The worst I could do is go from the
bottom,
log n steps to the top.
That's it.
There's no more distance I could travel that thing.
So that's good. This is how I can damage and
repair a heap.
This is what the code looks like.
You should use this code in part 2b.
When you're writing your binary heap, You're gonna have to
modify it some way to make it work,
because the math in this one is based upon that one index thing
that we saw on the slide there.
So is there a case where after you fix up a few levels that you
then have to compare to either a weak node,
not just the one that you came up the path from?
So the question is,
as I'm fixing up, Is there ever any need for me to check
anything else,
right? Check to the side to see that.
So remember how this works.
If we know that,
sort of I've got this rooted, I'm fixing,
sub-rooted or even if it's a real root,
as I'm fixing my way up to that,
everything below here that was already in good shape is less
than this.
So even if I get up here and I'm bigger than my new sibling or
less than my new sibling,
doesn't matter. The heap ordering says,
as long as you're not bigger than your parent,
you're where you belong.
So we don't have to check side to side.
We just have to check that path of ancestry up until we're
either the root or we're not more important than a parent.
So this is the code here.
Let's read it in English.
I've got this loop that goes on. while k I'm fixing up from k, I
pass in the heap itself, and k is the location where I'm fixing
up from.
So it says while k is greater than one,
what does that mean? While I'm not fixing up from the root,
right? Because when k is one,
that's the root.
So if I'm somewhere below the root and what's
that k over two?
That's my parent. and at K is just what I'm
looking at it's going off here sorry so as long as I'm not the
root and my parent
is less important than I am do this body what does it say
just swap you with your parent great and then
point at you again.
K div equals 2.
So if I swap you with your parent,
because this was your index and I divide that, now I'm pointing
back at you.
So this just says as long as this thing isn't the root
and it's more important than its parent,
move it up,
move it up,
move it up.
We will stop at the root or we'll just stop when we're not
too important.
Real simple.
It's converted. like I said when you write yours
in p1 part p2b you've got a situation where all the math and
the stuff we've shown you is one index you can rewrite the math
so that it's zero indexed you can insert a dummy element
so that there's something that you never look at that
physically at zero and then you can actually do the one based
math you can write translation functions that lets you sort
of ask for it in one-based but then you receive it in
zero-based so there's a few different ways you can modify
this that's why it's not just a super low-hanging fruit but this
is the hard part all right so what happens when
we decrease something's priority right so In this case,
we're changing that 18 at position two down to a three.
Now you see,
as we lower something's priority,
we're never going to have a problem with its parent.
You are already less important than your parent.
If we lower your priority,
you are in fine shape.
However,
if your priority gets lowered as such that your children are now
a problem, then we have to do some fixing.
So you see here,
three and 81 are still perfectly fine.
if there were no children of three,
I could just leave this and be done.
But as I have to work on fixing myself down,
now I've got two options.
I could fix down to the left, I could fix down to the right.
Which one should it be?
Always left?
Is it always right?
Since the heap doesn't have any relative comparison left to
right, we can't make a rule that says we will always go left
because we know the left is the bigger,
we know the right is the bigger or whatever.
We can't always do that because heap ordering doesn't care.
As long as the both of them aren't more important than their
parent,
they could be any kind of way.
So,
let's just find the smallest,
I'm sorry, let's find the most important child
and swap with that.
So I look at nine and seven and say,
well,
Which one's bigger?
Nine's bigger.
Swap a nine then.
That makes sure that the nine is where it belongs.
Had I swapped, for instance, with the seven,
I'd have the seven up top and the nine and the three down
below, and I still wouldn't be right because I'd have to fix
the seven in response to fixing to the nine there in relation to
the nine.
So we'll do this again.
Now we're here,
we can only fix our way all the way down to the bottom or until
we don't need to.
We take the largest child,
that's four.
If four is more important than three,
then I should do a swap.
And now I got heap.
Pretty good?
Yeah.
Yes,
absolutely.
You have to implement this.
This is for the binary heap PQ.
So here's that code. It's a little bit more involved,
but we can read it just the same.
Right? We're doing the same thing.
We're passing in the heap.
In this case, because we're passing it in C style, we need
to know where the heap ends.
You're gonna be putting yours in a vector, so there's no need to
pass in that second parameter of the size Because you know it.
You just ask the vector what's the size, right? And then the
last thing in this is where we're fixing down from,
right?
The while loop that goes on in two, while two times k is less
than or equal to heap size.
What does that say?
Two times k,
if that's less than or equal to heap size then the left child is
in the tree, right?
Basically we're just saying as long as we're not at a leaf
node,
do some stuff.
While we're not at a leaf node, let's find that left child.
J, we'll call it.
J is the index of the left child.
So we say,
if J is less than heap size,
what does that mean?
That means that a right child exists.
Because if J is heap size,
then it's the last thing.
And there's no other right child, which is at plus one.
So as long as there's a right child
And the left child is less than the right child.
Let's talk to the right child.
See that?
If what's at j is less than what's at j plus 1, if the left
child is less than the right child,
then plus plus j,
move on from the left child.
Now j is pointing at the most important child.
This is the index of, I should say.
Started out as the index of the left child.
and then if the right child existed and was more important,
we switched it to the right child by plus-plusing J.
It's just two times K plus one for the right child.
So now we know that J is the index of the largest child.
The next step says, well,
if K is more important than the most important child, there's
nothing to do here, break out.
If what's at K is not more important than the most
important child,
swap them, however, and then follow the thing that we're
swapping down set K equal to J it's good enough yeah
that check
right there on the other half of the and in four right four
starts with let me see if there's a right child and then
the second half says if what's at J if what's the what's that
the left child is less important than the right child,
increment J.
Because plus one is then we're looking at two times K plus one,
the right child.
Yeah,
one up there?
Okay, you got it?
Sweet.
Okay,
so I think the look you're looking at here is if something
is bigger than both of these leaf nodes
over here
okay
so if I back up I guess I can't
back up a that there we
go so from the three stage right
here where I'm trying to get because night now if it's if
it's smaller than both the leaf nodes you're saying if
cave it's bigger than both leaf nodes and I just stop right
because then heap ordering is good.
So if this was like a 10 or something like that,
so now it's bigger.
So in this case,
I wouldn't have swapped it down to where it was.
Right, I'm gonna stop when it,
when the swapping is no more fun, right?
So let me clean this up.
So here, if it was a 10,
I wouldn't swap it down Because it wouldn't be out of position.
It's all good.
Ten here,
eight there.
Six here.
Right?
Well it still takes the most important child, which is the
ten, and swaps it,
right? So then we get a swap here,
we look like 10 there,
six here,
and then we'd be following the six because that's the one that
we're fixing down,
right?
Because you see from 10,
10 is good.
10 is more important than both its children.
The question is, is six more important than both its
children?
And in this case it is, so I would just stop here,
right,
so I either go until I'm not less important than my children,
or until I'm a leaf node.
All right?
Sweet.
There was one other one?
Good?
All right.
So we got code for this.
You've got to modify them.
You've got to put that into your P2B.
You should be working on P2B as in parallel with P2A.
Remember, you've only got two submits on P2B a day.
And every day that you don't work on it is two submits that
are just gone forever.
So work on it a bit.
When you're working on P2B,
the sorted PQ should be like six or seven lines of code.
That's all you have to write if you use the STL.
Just use the STL. It's six lines,
seven lines. You've got a modifier,
add,
done.
Then the next one is the heat-based one.
That one,
all the code is here. You just kind of got to massage
it in there to get it to work right,
right?
And then the third one is a pairing heap and that one's much
more complicated. Definitely save multiple days to
get that done at the end because it's all about pointers and you
have to do it right.
You have to do it right.
The good news is the pairing heap behaves in most cases
just like Project 1
where you take a container,
you seed the container,
and then you say, let me get something out of the container.
If it's got
things near it, I put them back in the container to deal with
them later.
I process this, then I go get the next thing.
If there's something near this,
I put it in there,
and I keep doing that same project one algorithm for the
pairing heap.
That goes for the copy constructor,
the destructor, and operator equals,
it also works like that in pop except pop doesn't go forever
pop just goes one level so that's that all right priority
queue implementations we talked about PQs we know what a
priority queue is it's a data structure that supports these
three operations put stuff in take stuff out and look at the
most important thing push top
and pop some pretty familiar names in the way that we've
already done with other things so this looks exactly name wise
like a queue or a stack right we push into a stack and we take
the top thing out of a stack even though this is a queue so
it's great for good confusing language here and it also if you
want use a priority queue you don't include priority queue you
just include Q which is also confusing but you include
Q and then it's based on a vector that's where it is
so how do we insert into a priority queue one thing that we
know is if we keep these things as a heap we said that we were
gonna keep our heaps as these complete binary trees.
So if I were to insert something,
I know,
regardless of where things end up,
what the tree is going to be shaped like,
right?
After I insert one more thing,
there has to be another thing right there,
all right?
My next node is going to be, There is going to be a left
child of index 5 at index 10.
So to make this happen then,
the thought is, why don't I just take the new thing and put it
there?
Sounds like a good plan.
So push as something's going there,
let's just put the number we're putting 100 in there.
Now, my memory is the right size.
I've got things where things are going to be, They're just not
where they all belong.
But what do I need to do here?
Fix up, right?
I put something in a low position that could be more
important than its parent, so let me fix this thing all the
way up to the top or as high as I need to.
In this case, I do need to go all the way to the top.
I can swap seven and 100 and find its parent,
18 and 100,
find its parent,
and that's how push works.
Super easy you master fix up and you push something at the very
back and fix it up
The STL priority queue does it if you just push it is does this
right the STL just has that interface push pop and top
Whatever you push push push push push, and then you say hey top.
Here's the most important thing You say pop is they remove that
thing and make sure that the next most important thing is at
the top again
All right, so you're going to have to write this for your
priority key.
My suggestion is to write the fix up and fix down functions
and then call them as helper functions in this stuff here
because this is really simple. Look at that.
This is how push works.
What does it do?
It says make the heap size a little bit larger,
write our new item at that position
and then fix up from there.
That's what we just saw. So yours is like I said gonna be
C++ based so we don't have to worry about heap size you can
probably just do a push back on the vector that is your data
push back and then fix up from back or the index of back
however you want to pull that off all right how about deletion
same thing is true I know what the shape of this tree is going
to be when I get done nine will not exist what I don't want to
do is get rid of the value that's at nine because four is
not the most important thing it should not be removed it should
be saved for later I want to get rid of the most important thing
that's the 81 so let's do that and think of it
as gone now I need to get rid of this node at nine but I don't
want to get rid of the value at nine so why don't I just replace
the 81 with that four?
Is that good?
I lopped that off, my tree is perfectly shaped,
but I broke some stuff with an easy fix down to get me out of
it, right?
Because I know if I take something from the last position
in the container and move it up to the root, it has probably
broken my heap. It's probably gonna be less
important than at least one of its children.
So now let's just fix down from four.
As we saw fixed down earlier,
that one's pretty easy. I find the largest child, 18 or
14.
I pick 18,
swap with it.
Now I find the largest child,
nine or seven,
nine,
I swap with it.
And now I pick my largest child,
two.
I'm not more important than that.
I am more important than that, so I don't need to be swapped,
sorry.
Yeah,
the fixes are assuming that we have a perfectly good heap that
we broke in one position,
and we're fixing from that one position, yep,
everything else is already
So,
after the nodes popped,
did we take the second-to-last node instead of the last node?
We took the last node,
yep,
right,
so I was here,
I deleted the top thing, and I took the four from this last
position,
yep, and pushed it up there, right, so the shape is correct,
and the values are, nothing's lost,
yep,
then we fixed it on down,
wop, Wop, wop, wop.
We're good.
All right, so you can write this one too.
It's just about as easy once you've got this fixed down
helper.
What do we say?
Let's overwrite the root with our last item, make the heap one
smaller, and then fix down from the root,
the end,
right? We pass in heap size here.
Remember I said you won't need to pass in heap size because
you'll be able to ask the vector inside that function what is
your size what is the last one all right
you can do this this is something can get you some
points pretty quickly right get that code in there start trying
to mash it up XKCD to help us out of this one
it's a Christmas tree with a heap of presents underneath,
and then mom and dad are so over it that they're not going to
invite him home next year.
Not only is that terrible, so any time you go see an XKCD, if
you hover over it, there's some extra text that pops up.
This is the extra text. Not only is it terrible in
general, but you just know Billy's going to open the root
present first, and then everyone will have to wait while the heap
is rebuilt.
Huge nerd humor,
right? What happens if we take the root off, right? We've got
to fix our way until everything is rebuilt.
So that is heap humor.
Here's our summary.
A priority queue is an abstract data type that supports
inspection, insertion, and removal.
We can do this multiple ways.
We will have given you the unordered PQ.
That one is good because it's got a constant time insert.
You just put data anywhere.
It's bad because it's got a linear search then involved to
find the largest item.
If you want to remove the largest item you've got to do
that same linear work if you've forgotten where it was the last
time you found it but if you remember where it was when you
found it you can remove it in constant time as long as it's
following a linear inspection so we can never get away from
constant in linear out.
Unordered fast says if you do a top I will remember where that
most important thing is, so if your next step is pop,
we can do it in constant time.
And it does that by saying, well I found it in the middle,
how do I get rid of something in the middle of a vector in
constant time?
It's pretty hard,
unless you swap it to the back and pop it off.
So that's what the unordered fast PQ does,
and that's what you should do even in the unordered slow
version, is you should just swap things to the back because you
don't care about the order. It doesn't matter if you change
the order to get rid of something.
In the sorted array, it's much better, because I will always
keep the most important thing
at the end,
which makes it really easy to get rid of.
It's gone.
But keeping things sorted at the insertion step is more work,
because not only do I have to do a log n search of where the
thing belongs, but I have to do a linear possibly insertion to
slide things away to make room for it.
So that one comes out in constant time, but takes linear
time to add to.
With the unordered array fast,
with insertion equal,
then can you build your algorithm to make sure the
highest one didn't get changed?
No,
so the question is the unordered fast,
does the insertion require a linear lookup? It doesn't.
So you still stick it in in constant time, but in the
unordered fast it just says, okay, now that you've changed
it,
I don't know where the most important thing is.
so the next top requires the linear search right
the same thing with a pop I mean once I've popped I don't know
where the most important thing is either it doesn't do
additional linear searches unless you ask for it so I mean
you could keep it that way but then I would turn that into a
linear thing as opposed to a constant thing
No, so when you call top you have to find the most important
thing. So it does a linear search and
identifies where that is and it returns it and you could be done
there but the unordered fast says well I'm gonna remember
what that index because if you choose the top next if you
choose the pop next I
won't have to do linear search I can just look it up right but
anytime you modify it it automatically forgets what the
most important thing is right so if you add it forgets what the
most important thing is if you pop it forgets what the most
important thing is you're gonna have to do another linear search
to find that yeah
If you do the swap,
then it does it in constant time,
right?
Because what we're trying to get rid of is,
like, I want to take the fifth thing out of 20 out of here.
I don't want to delete number five and then move six and seven
and eight and nine and ten. I don't want to move all of them
back one space to keep that full.
Right, and because I don't care what the order is, I can move
that 20th thing into the fifth position,
and it's just as good, right?
Alright, the heap one is the one that we're gonna be doing we're
gonna do sorted and we're gonna do heap But the sort is pretty
easy. Like I said, if you use insert
if you use
lower bound, which is an STL function to find stuff and
insert you should be able to get this done in
Six lines code seven lines of code.
The heap is efficient because it's n log.
It's the log n
Insertion it's a log n removal
And I get constant time inspection at the top.
So my two functions that are involving work are only log n.
And the inspection, I can get that in constant time.
That's pretty good.
You have to maintain the heap property, though, to do it.
All right.
That's our PQ implementations. That's 2b.
How about heapify?
How do I get a heap when I don't have a heap?
That's what this one is.
it's easy if I've got an empty thing and I want to make a heap,
they just keep it in heap order as I put things in there.
I insert,
I fix up,
it's great. But what if I got a whole bunch
of data that I want it to be a heap?
And that's what heapify is.
And we've already learned about these two modifying functions,
we're still just going to use them, that's all we have,
fix up or fix down.
So it turns out that I can work in two directions,
I can work from the bottom up and I can work from the top down
and I've got two operations so I can work from the top
down everywhere I go I can also fix down
right I can work from the bottom up and everywhere I go I can
also fix up then I got the two Contras where I can work
from the top down and everywhere I go I fix back up.
Or I can work from the bottom up, and everywhere I go,
I fix down.
So those four ways of sort of modifying a heap and
looking at every item are how I'm going to get to heapify.
Turns out that two of them don't work.
Same direction,
same motion, just don't always work.
So if I work from the top down,
fixing down,
I'm not guaranteed to get a heap.
If I work from the Bottom up, fixing up,
also not guaranteed to get a heap.
I could just sort the thing in reverse order,
that would work,
but it would also cost me n log n,
and I'd like to go faster than that if I could.
If I go in opposite order of the way I'm fixing, so I start at
the last item, let's say I start at
nine and then eight and then seven and then six and then five
and then four and then three and two.
If I take each one of those and fix down from that position,
nine fix down, eight fix down,
seven fix down,
six, fifth down.
So that's me working up the tree, but fixing down.
That one works.
Right?
It also works if I work from the top down, say take from the
root,
fix up.
Go from two, fix up, go three, fix up,
four, fix up,
five, fix up, six fix up that's me working down the tree as my
indexes increase and my fixing up going in the opposite
direction so both of those work but if I work from the top down
I get something that's not so great right
here's the four options right and this is what the
STL does it works from the bottom to the top largest index
to smallest index and every new index it finds it fixes down
contra motion there if I go the other route start at the top
and fix up everywhere
I go it also works but it ends up being n log n
which is no better than just reverse sorting so we're not
gonna do that one and you see these two in the middle here
going the same direction fixing the same direction as I'm
traveling they both just don't work and there's a couple of
examples you can just try these numbers of if this is what I
start with and I want to work my way repeated fixed down fixed
down from one fixed down from two fixed down from three I'll
end up with a non heap
you do
have a bunch of leaf notes which is great because you don't have
to do any work there right so fixing down from a leaf node
you're right there's nothing to do it has no children which is
why we actually end up keeping this thing as linear it's a big
part of it
yeah
well I'll show you I'll show you a good example of it and so but
that's why it why it does work because we we can cut out a
whole lot of work all right so here's Here's my Heapify
exercise.
We're going to use bottom-up fix-down.
So right away,
we already pointed out over here,
fixing down from five, six, seven, eight, and nine are
guaranteed to do nothing.
Fix-down says,
let me swap places with my most important child if it's bigger
than me. And none of them, five, six,
seven, eight, and nine, have children.
So I can sort of just like,
hey, they're good. if those were the heap I'd be
done now okay so what next then now I move so this is this has
all happened in sort of one big flash but in reality we said
nine no work eight no work seven no work six no work five no work
now we're at four what happens in four I'm gonna fix down
from four so four is in bad shape I'm gonna find its largest
child that's the 81 we do the and I'm done,
fixing down from four.
Now we go to three,
fix down from three.
Three is out of place,
we find its largest child, that looks like the 14,
we do the swap,
and three's done.
Now we go to two,
two's got two in it, its largest child is 81,
so we're probably gonna have to swap there.
We're gonna follow two all the way down though, because a fix
down doesn't stop after the first swap, it stops when we hit
a leaf node or we're not less important than any of our
children.
So I look at 2 has children 18 and 1, 18 is the largest and 18
is larger than 2, so I should do a swap there.
Now 2 is a leaf node and I'm heaped from 2 down.
Yeah.
That's where we were when we did that swap.
When 3 was the place we're fixing down from, I said well
which one of these two children is larger? Because I don't care
about the children's relative priority,
right?
9 and 5 could be in either position as long as they're
below 14,
right? because a relative five could come before nine or come
after nine and they'd still both be less than 14 so that's good
all right so we get to two we fix two swap it down twice and
now we've fixed everything except for the root so the root
is the last place i have to fix down from it's four its largest
child is the 81 let's swap with that four is largest child after
that as the 18, we'll swap there,
and then four is not smaller than any of its children, so we
just stop.
And that's my heap.
It's different, same numbers as before,
but slightly different ordering,
but still a perfect good heap.
So that's how Heapify worked.
Now, what was key about that is I did this in linear time.
It's a little harder to see,
but I did it in linear time. How do I know that I did it in
linear time?
Well, let's just do some hand-wavy 203,
right?
Well, for five of those nodes, I did no work.
Five, six, seven, eight, nine, I did no work.
The most work I could do for four was one swap.
The most work I could do at three was one swap.
The most work I could do at two was two swaps.
And then the most work that I could do from the root was three
swaps
So the most work I could do with this method is Seven
swaps how many items there's nine items?
Make sense
As you grow the tree
it grows in the same way I'll show you a better mathy slide
for that but you can see here that I just didn't have to do
that much work because I'm fixing down we already figured
out there's nothing to do from the leaf nodes but then though
the nodes that are one level above that they've only got one
swaps worth of work and they're either fixed or you don't even
need to do the swap all right so here we can look at it that was
the logical version we'll see the physical version they're all
good we're fixing our way down from one,
we need to swap with the larger of those two,
and that gets me there. Then I work my way down from
five,
I swap with the largest of those two.
This gets me a good and heap-like.
I work from the two down,
I swap the largest of those two, that's the 81.
It's still not deep enough,
so I look at its children now, that's the 18 and the one,
I swap it there.
And this is just the code that you're writing here for heapify,
which is the range-based constructor on the binary heap
priority queue.
Fix down,
fix,
fix,
fix,
fix,
fix.
Good?
Yeah?
So like, when you're calling heapify,
is it like,
kind of assuming that at a particular layer
all the fun nodes in the layer below that are valid heaps?
In Heapify,
I'm starting from absolute garbage and going to heap.
But yes, because we're traveling from the bottom up,
I know that everything below me is already heap ordered when I
get there, right? So I can say,
here I'm fixing, you know,
index 2. I know these two things are
heaps.
I don't have to worry about fixing anything underneath me.
Just make sure I'm not more important than my children.
Or I am more important than my children.
Keep saying that backwards. All right, perfect.
So let's look more mathy at the complexity slide here.
So now you see this one has got a full depth four all the way
filled, which gives me a solid 15 items.
What happens when I've got this?
I know for a fact that there's zero swaps to be done for eight
of those nodes.
They're already leaf nodes.
How about at the next level there can be at most four nodes
there and at most one swap per node so we're maxing out at four
swaps and I've already got 12 of my 15 items
heaped right with four swaps at the next level there can be only
two nodes and they can only be swapped twice and they will all
be all the way down as a leaf node so two nodes two swaps
that's four more swaps max if I have to swap everything and then
lastly at the root in this particular instance at depth 4
to get up there I've got three swaps to get me down to the
bottom and there's only one node that can go through that much
work so you put all that together and you end up with 15
total nodes with a maximum of 11 swaps to get it fixed that's
linear time if I make this larger so I got a 5 height tree
that's got 31 nodes I can do that in 26 swaps if I got a 6
height tree that's got 63 nodes I can do that in 57 swaps a 7
height tree is 127 nodes I can do that in 120 swaps I can
always get this fixed from garbage to heap using this
algorithm in linear time
faster than inserting them one at a time, because that's log n
work,
n times,
n log n,
and it takes me the double memory of having this pile over
here and the new heap over there.
I could do it in place by sorting in reverse,
that's n log n work.
This is linear, it's in place and it's linear,
heapify.
This is what you'll do with with your range-based constructor p2b
heap.
Copy all the stuff into your new data vector and then heapify.
All right, new topic.
Sorting with a heap.
So the heap is great. It's got the most important
thing out there.
If I look at how it looks logically, I'm pretty
comfortable with that. I'm comfortable with this
physical thing as well.
Now, when I end up with something sorted,
what do I want? I want this most important thing down here at the
end.
Then I want the second most important thing next to it, and
the third most important thing next to it, and so on.
So,
that's what Heapsort does.
Let me start with a heap,
and then I will turn this heap into a sorted range.
and it does it by dividing into the container into like two
parts right so we got the part that has a heap in it and we
have the other part that is the sorted area all right so here's
what we do let's just swap the route with the tail there so
now this is exactly right for my sorted thing right because it's
the biggest thing it should be at the end but my heap is busted
up What I'm also going to do is say let's just ignore the 81
from now on and say this isn't even part of the heap.
The only thing that's part of the heap is that red root that's
broken and all these other white nodes that need to be fixing the
heap. So when I go to fix my heap
down,
I'm not gonna fix the one all the way down to 81.
I'm gonna fix the one all the way down here to index eight,
and stop,
right? So what would happen?
One would swap with 18,
one would swap with seven,
and now I've got a perfectly good heap in the white section,
and a perfectly good sorted array in the green section.
Every time I go through a step of this,
I make the heap smaller,
I make the sorted area bigger. So let's swap 18 next to 81.
you see my sorted area is growing my heap is shrinking
it's a broken heap now if I fix from two down as long as I stop
before I get to 18 I've got a perfectly good heap now and a
perfectly good sorted container one growing the other shrinking
push 14 down to the end fixed down from five
Swap 9 to the end.
Fix down from 2.
You see it?
Make sense? This is heap sort. So what does this cost me?
If I have a heap,
then I do this swap thing. That's a constant amount of
work.
I got a broken heap,
and I fix it down, which is, in the worst case, log n work.
I do that n times.
Heapsort is n log n if I have a heap.
What if I don't have a heap?
Well,
making a heap just cost me n.
I throw the n in underneath there and still do the n log n
work and end up with a sort. So heapsort is an n log n sort.
Even if I don't have a heap, I turned it into a heap in linear
time
and then I do this n moves where I put the most important thing
remaining farthest back and shrink the heap up until the
heap is gone and I just have a sorted array so I'll go on from
here I'll swap the seven down into good position now I've got
a broken heap in those first four I fixed down go for it
yes you're saying that you've got a smaller end so in our
fixed down version from before, the fix down that you probably
wrote in P2,
you just used the size of the container.
Here, you've got to be able to pass that size where you want to
stop.
So the original fix down that we added in the earlier slides
would be much more useful in this.
For the time complexity,
you just say it's still in.
Which is in?
The log n.
The log n time of fix down, yes.
Worst case is log n fixing all the way down to here, but you're
right. As we get smaller and smaller,
our fixes are shorter and shorter and shorter.
Yeah.
All right. So what's left? I got these four
more moves. I'm going to put five where it
belongs,
fix this 2-4-1 thing,
put four where it belongs,
and life is good.
That's heap sort.
So we talked about heaps, we can use them to make priority
queues. We can also use them as a tool
inside this heap sort algorithm.
So there's heap sort in real short terms, right?
We start out in line two. We turn the data we have into a
heap.
And then we've got this reverse for loop that just swaps the
current thing that we're trying to get out of there from the
root down to its lowest position.
And then we fix down and ignore that place where we just put the
root.
So that's heap sort.
Real simple if you've got heap,
if you got fixed out.
So,
take the given n elements, convert them into a heap,
which I can do that in linear time.
If I don't have a heap,
I spend the linear time to get there.
Then I remove the elements one at a time, filling the original
array from back to front. So I get to do this in place,
which is also important. I didn't have to copy the data
to sort them.
I do it in place and then fix down a smaller section, a
smaller section, a smaller section, and it ends up being
big O,
n log n in time,
constant memory in place.
All right,
where we at?
Questions on heaps and heap sort?
Question on heapify,
fix up, fix down,
priority queues.
It's good?
All right.
Well, I am going to load up another deck.
It gives you a second to breathe feel free to stand up shake it
off
that's
why that's making so much noise
All
right.
Let's get after it again.
We're starting our catch-up here.
We're earlier in the lecture and we're starting, we have 30
minutes to get after this one.
We see here a collection of peas,
beans maybe,
I don't know.
This one is sort of an ordered set.
You can think of this,
an ordered container,
ordered collection,
things in this pea pod don't move around.
That's the short version of what order it is.
Things don't move around unless you move them around.
I mean, I could come up here and physically pull this P out and
pull that one out and swap them.
I could.
But they're not going to change by themselves.
And that's what's important about an order container.
And also, it's worth noting that the opposite of sorted
is not unsorted it's unordered
so ordered and sorted are two opposites there so you see how
that goes into B right we've got the unordered container and the
sorted container we don't have an unsorted container it's
unordered and sorted so we know about binary search
we've seen that one before so let's just run it through an
example here I'm trying to find 21 you say there it is I found
it but I need an algorithm to do this as well so what do I do I
look at the thing in the middle and binary search only works on
my data are already sorted so when I look at the middle I can
say what am I looking at versus what am I looking for if what
I'm looking at is what I'm is less than what I'm looking for I
need to move past that if what I'm looking at is more than what
I'm looking for I need to stop when I get that high.
So in this case,
I picked the 13.
I can look to the right from here.
When I've got an odd number of items,
I take the actual middle item.
When I've got an even number of items, because of the way
integer division works, I always end up with the thing just to
the left
of the midpoint.
So here were the four of them.
I'm going to take the second one, because there is no true
middle item.
Now I compare that to what I'm looking for.
It turns out that it's greater than, so I'm going to look to
the left of 25. I don't need to look at 25
anymore.
I can just look at everything but the 25.
Same thing was true when I found the 13.
I don't have to look at the 13 again, so I can start after the
13.
Now when I'm down to the 21,
I have found what I'm looking for.
So that's how binary search works.
And we see this nice solid dividing my container in half,
dividing my container in half. You see why this is log n right
Nothing new there
Binary search requires assorted elements.
This is what a binary search function might look like so this
is the STL style where we're looking at something that is
a Half open interval
So my left index is going to be the index of the very first item
and my right index is going to be the index just past the last
good data item.
I've got the array, I've got my indexes that I'm sorting on,
and I've got the searching on, sorry, and I've got the value
that I'm looking for.
We've seen this code already before in a couple of slides.
While right is greater than left,
meaning I have some place to search,
because as soon as right and left are equal, that means I've
got a zero size search area,
right? Because remember I said, the right is always pointing
just past good data.
If the right is pointing at the first thing,
there's no good data there.
So if right is equal to left,
I'm done,
or greater than is fine, I'm out as well.
Sorry,
less than is out.
But what do I do? I find the middle item and I say in line
five,
if what I'm looking at, If what I'm looking for is what I'm
looking at,
then I found it, return it.
If what I'm looking for, if val is equal to what's in a at mid,
if what I'm looking for is what I'm looking at,
return that location,
mid.
Otherwise,
if what I'm looking for is less than what I'm looking at,
I should ignore that thing that I'm looking at and grab
everything to the left of it.
So I'll leave the left boundary exactly where it was and update
only the right boundary. And what do I update the right
boundary to?
I update the right boundary to the thing that I'm looking at.
Because, once again, I move on,
right is always pointing just past good data.
I will never look at the thing I'm looking at again.
That's why I set right equal to mid when I want to ignore it.
If I want to ignore it from the other side, I have to set left
equal to one plus that.
That gets me past it.
So that's how this one goes. In the end, if I don't find the
thing that I'm looking for, it's not there,
then I return negative 1.
This is a really straightforward binary search implementation.
We understand it?
Questions?
It's good?
It's great.
Excellent.
Needs to be sorted first.
I've got some extra writing there.
It loops at most k times, one step, one step, one step, One
step, one step,
one step, there we go.
Looks like that.
Big O of k, we know that to be k is equal to log n.
All right, there's binary search.
How do we compare elements that are objects?
I can't use this type of comparison or this type of
comparison when I have an object.
This is where I need to have some function that looks at
these two things,
and tells me yes or no how I need to order them.
That's what this red question is.
I've got to do it with some function that's going to apply
on those things. Probably a function object,
func door,
but I could also do it with just a regular function.
So this one jumps into C++
17's optional.
So what do we have going on here?
I've got that same binary search
code.
But it's returning this optional thing now,
right?
An optional UN32 type there.
And when I've got nothing found there, it returns this curly
brace thing. So as I go for this bsearch
function up there,
I say auto position equal to that.
If pos has value,
then I found it at pos.v. value.
So this is what optional does in C++ 17.
You don't have to worry too much about it.
This is just an aside sort of thing so you can pick up new
syntax.
All right.
We said we would be able to use some functions if we needed to
compare objects.
So we're getting into comparators again.
We've seen comparators before.
Here is an xy coordinate in a thing called struct point.
It's got a default constructor that gives me the origin x
equals 0 y equals 0 It's got a custom constructor that I can
pass in an XY and assign them to X and Y There's my
point
This is a comparator that would allow me to compare two points
and
What does it do it returns true if?
A's X is
greater than B's X
So if I were to use a comparator like this to sort a bunch of
points,
how would they come out?
For a whole array full of vector full of points,
I said standard sort begin to end and use this compare by x
comparator.
How would they end up being sorted?
Yeah.
Not priority queue, just sorted.
So yeah, so this would be a decreasing sort in the
x-coordinate, right?
You can always tell by the shape of that arrow,
right?
That shape of that arrow says we're going to take the big
things and get down to the small things.
So if I were to use this in a sort algorithm, it would put
them in reverse order by X biggest X down to smallest X if
I were to use this comparator inside a priority queue of these
things what would it do it would give me the ones with the
smallest X first right because the greater
style comparison makes me have a min
pq so if I use this in a Priority queue,
this would give me the smallest x, then the next smallest x, and
the next smallest x, and the next smallest x, all the way up
to the largest x at the very end.
That's how this one would work.
This one is a compare by y comparator that you see the
alligators bite in the other direction.
So this is going to give me,
yeah, go for it.
Oh, yeah, it's gonna be totally dependent on what your
application is right sometimes you need things sorted sometimes
You just need the most important thing so
It really depends on the problem that you're facing yeah
So if I were to use this one and sorted them they would be an
increasing order by why I If I put them on a priority queue, I
would get the largest y first.
So this is how to read these things in function objects.
All right. Back to binary search.
Let's see if we can make it faster.
Faster is better.
We like faster.
We're not going to get it faster than log n.
That's the first thing. But we can still do it faster
than,
we can change our constant factors.
So what we're going to do is look at the fact that when I'm
in a binary search,
the is equal to rarely happens,
right? It happens at most once per search, right? If what I'm
looking for is there, I will find it, and that last time I
find it,
equals equals will actually have return true.
All the other times, though,
it's going to return false.
If it's not there,
what I'm looking for is not there, it will never return
true.
It could, in the very worst case,
return true at the very last thing.
So then the question becomes,
if I want to optimize,
shouldn't I be doing the thing that's going to happen the most
often first?
We say,
optimize for the common case.
Commonly,
that's just gonna say no.
So there's more work to be done after that.
and I'm just asking for a no that I'm expecting so they can
do more work later.
So what if I said, well, let's just not ask that question?
Or at least let's ask it later.
What if I checked less than first?
So less than is pretty opinionated.
You either are less than or you aren't, right?
So if I check less than first,
I'm always going to know where what I'm looking for is.
Now if I check equals,
I got these two halves.
Say this thing in the middle equal?
Yes,
well where,
no.
So well where's the thing I'm looking for then?
I don't know. It's either over there or it's
over there.
But if I say let's try less than, say nope it's not less
than,
it's definitely over there, isn't it? Or if it is less than,
it's definitely over there.
So after that one test, I have a side picked.
Whereas if I start with equals, I don't have a side picked.
I just know I haven't found it yet
So if we do that we go pick a side first then we say well If
that's not the side, let's go to the other side and if that's not
the side then it must be equal So that's how we're gonna
rewrite this
Look at this version. It just sort of well.
This is the original version. Sorry
This is the one with a negative one in it so in this one we see
that every time through the loop We've got these three
comparisons Do I have some data to search? That's right versus
left, first comparison.
Did I find the thing I'm looking for?
No, that doesn't almost never happens.
Then if not,
should I look to the left, or should I look to the right?
So every time through the loop,
the only time that I don't have three comparisons is when I
actually find it and I'm done.
So if we reorder things like this,
this one gives me two comparisons half the time.
I'm always gonna have the comparison to see do I have
data.
Is right greater than left?
Yes.
Then my second comparison to say,
well,
is what I'm looking at less than what I'm looking for? If that's
the case,
then I know it's over there.
So let's adjust left.
Otherwise, let's adjust right if it's over there,
right? So I've got an else if there.
So half the time I'm good with six and I go to the right side
the correct side. I should say
Also the right
The other half of the time I've got to make this second check so
now I've gone from three
comparisons per loop
to two and a half
It's pretty good.
I know you're not wildly impressed yet.
It's like two and a half comparisons, but
Look at this version.
Now this version is a little trick on there.
So watch the name of this function.
That's bsearch.
That's lower bound.
It's a different function.
It's using a binary search algorithm, but it returns
something that's always
in the range.
Remember the previous one I said, if I couldn't find the
thing, I'm gonna give you a negative one.
Great.
This one, though,
has no equals check in it.
We say, hey, I'm going to make sure that I stay in bounds.
That's one.
And then I'm going to either go to the right
or I'm going to go to the left,
always.
So now this is down to two checks per loop.
But what do we get when we return it, right?
Sometimes we get the right answer, sometimes we don't.
But in the old version,
what was the first thing we did after we called binary search
anyways?
We said, hey, was that negative one?
Because if it's negative one, then you didn't find it.
Then we'll use what you got.
So this version says,
hey, I think this is it.
They say, well, is this what I was really looking for? No,
okay, then what I was looking for wasn't there.
Or,
if this is what I'm looking for,
yes.
Well, hey, I found it for you.
So that's how this one works.
It returns this left here,
whatever left is.
And what the lower bound is,
is the first item
that's not less than what I'm looking for.
I gotta sort a container.
The lower bound is the first item not less than what I'm
looking for.
So,
if what I'm looking for is there,
found it,
right?
If I'm looking for four,
the first item not less than four is four.
If it's not in there, though,
I might get five or six.
But what this does is it takes that check for equality and
removes it from the loop entirely.
after I get done searching I have one check say hey did I
find what I was looking for if so then here's where it is
otherwise what I was looking for wasn't there so this one's
better because now it's two checks per loop every time
why is that better is it slightly different factor
it's
not
Let's do like some simple math on that.
Imagine you have a job, and your job is you sit at this computer
all day,
and you perform binary searches.
That's all you do.
You've got a list of binary searches you've got to get done
every day,
you've got eight hours to do it.
You're using that old algorithm.
Somebody comes along and says, well, you could use this factor
algorithm.
Now, what happens? like two hours and 40 minutes before five
o'clock you're done and you can go home so
seems like not much you go from two comparisons and three
comparisons but over time that adds up quick right so
this is why we want to reduce our constant factors whenever we
can even shaving off a little bit can really make some some
good time for you because I would love to go home every day
just after 2 in the afternoon.
It'd be a great job, wouldn't it?
Full-time pay,
home by noon,
home by 2 on a good day. Well,
there we go. So this is known as lower bound.
And this is the binary search function that you'll probably
use the most in the STL.
There is a binary search function in the STL,
but all it does is return a bool,
which confirms that what you're looking for is there or not.
So if you wanna know where it is, you still don't know.
Binary search true if it's there, returns false if it's not
there.
So not really that useful unless you're really just trying to
locate whether the thing is in there or not.
So the second example you brought up where first you look
at less than, then you go to greater than.
And then there's the equivalent check.
There's no real check, but it's the third else, right?
Like, if it's less than, I go over here.
If it's greater than, I go over there.
Otherwise, I must have found it.
That's half a check, because half the time, it is less than,
I just go over that way.
The other half the time, I say,
well, if it's less than, I would go over there.
Well, it's not less than. Well, is it greater than?
So half the time, I have to do this second check.
But half the time,
the first check is enough. I don't know,
okay,
but the important thing is it's not having to execute the if
statement.
For the equal.
Well,
it's not that it's important that we don't have to execute
the equal, because we're still getting the response back.
Let's say, if it's less than go over there,
if it's greater than go over there, otherwise I found it.
All that's done is reordered, because in the first version I
was saying, hey, did I find it? I was like, no,
okay, well, I still don't know anything.
I have to do another check every time to figure out, it's not in
the middle, should I go to the left side or the right side?
Right, in this one I say, should I go to the left side?
And half the time I should.
And so that's all I need to do check-wise.
The other half of the time I say,
should I go to the right side? And then that one last nth time
when you find it, I've already checked right and left,
or left and right,
and then I fall into the middle.
So,
if you start by checking for equivalence, you have to do
another check if you don't find it.
If you start by checking less than, half the time you don't
have to do another check.
You see what I mean?
If you look for less than half the time, you're like, yep, it
is less than this,
let's get over there. That's it.
Right, exactly,
yes.
Whereas when you start with equals, we have to do two checks
every time no matter what.
If we start with less than, we only do half,
we do one check half the time,
we do two checks half the time.
All right, so there's lower bound, and I already mentioned
that it finds the first thing not less than what I'm looking
for.
That's where we start with lower bound.
That's what you wanna do is to find the thing because when
you're looking for it,
if it's there,
that's it,
right?
I got a list of numbers.
One,
three,
seven, 11,
nine,
10,
15. I can't even say numbers, right?
What is the first thing in this sorted list that is not less
than nine?
It's nine.
Great.
What is the first thing in this list that is not less than 12?
It's 15.
What I'm looking for is not there.
So, after I get the thing back, I can do one last check.
Say, hey, now I can check for equality.
Or,
get this,
if I know that what I'm looking for is in there, if I'm
guaranteed that it's in there, I just need to find it,
It's always going to give back to me.
I don't even ever have to check for equals.
I just know it's coming out.
So that's what lower bound can do for you.
Upper bound is not great for finding things, it ranges stuff
for you. Go for it.
Yeah, because the upper bound says, I'm going to find you the
first thing greater than your target.
So if you're looking for nine with upper bound, it's gonna be
like, how about ten?
Right if nine isn't there you don't know if it's there or not
So upper bound won't help you in that way, right?
So I say what's the what I'm looking for a thing? That's in
there. I say what's the upper bound on
nine?
It'll say ten because it's the first thing greater than my
target Then what's the upper bound on twelve?
It'll say fifteen
Where does upper bound help me then?
Well, it's like it sounds.
Bound, range,
what do we do for the right thing? We say the right thing is
always pointing just past good data.
So now imagine that I had a 10 here,
and let's make this a 10 as well.
And if I were to do that, because I've got duplicates,
lower bound is going to be right here.
That's LB right lower bounds the first thing not less than 10 is
10.
What's the first thing greater than 10?
18
So that's what upper bound is going to give me now if I take
this I Should make that a B
Now I've got a range though, don't I if I start at left the
lower bound I
I got a 10,
I got a plus plus, I got a 10, I got a plus plus, I got a 10,
until I get to the upper bound, which is no longer a 10.
So everything in this range,
from lower bound to upper bound, is equal to the thing that I'm
searching for.
So if I've got multiple things,
I can use this binary search to find all of them.
That's pretty slick.
That's why it gets combined into this other function called equal
range basically just calls both of those things and gives me
back a pair this is a really good reason for pairs gives me
back a pair where the first thing is the lower bound and the
second thing is the upper bound and everything in that range in
between is equal to the thing that i'm searching for does that
make sense on equal range upper bound and lower bound like i
said if you're looking for a thing lower bound is your friend
if you want to know if a thing exists you can go ahead and use
binary search if you want to to play and
or equal range.
Yeah.
Exactly, that's right, exactly right.
So lower bound is an inclusive find and upper bound is an
exclusive find.
It's the first thing, just pass what you're looking for
just pass good data. It's just like the left and
right bounds, yeah.
Yes,
and that's what lower bound is,
is what I'm saying is lower bound is that same binary search
algorithm that will return you the thing if it's there but it
will return the next thing after it and it's faster because the
lower bound uses that third version of the algorithm where
we always do two comparisons every time through the loop.
So that's really what's going on there.
And I think the lower bound, I'm not quite sure how binary search
is actually implemented. It could be implemented like the
original one,
just returning a bool. I would imagine it would
probably be faster.
Maybe doing one more check on the lower bound to see if you
found what you've got and returning true or false on that.
So all right. so that's binary search
in the STL
so this is just a picture of how all of those things work when
I'm trying to find something so you see that this has lower
bound and upper bound for when the thing that you're looking
for is there and when it's not so lower bound on 7 find 7
lower bound on 26 when it's not there finds 31 upper bound on
21 finds 25 after that and upper bound on the thing that's there
go on and so on so that's really how those two things work learn
them use them they will help you in p2
and that gets me to that side all
right lunch time
