Let's just stick with what we got.
And say,
I'm happy to be here.
You should be happy to be here
All right,
all right, let's get at it. We left off at
Tail recursion, I think that's where we cut right here wasn't
it?
We're talking about stack frame re-usage and then
My next slide was this one here, which we didn't get into we were
talking about
factorial,
which is another function that is very easily recursively
defined,
because factorial is just 5 times 4 times 3 times 2 times 1.
You multiply those things down.
But you can also define that recursively and say factorial 5
is just 5 times factorial 4,
and factorial 4 is just 4 times factorial 3.
And so you can see this version of it right there in the
recursive setup.
And so this slide's got some blank space on it for me to draw
to you what those stack frames kind of look like and why
they're required.
So we start out with a
presentation.
Then things get better.
That's better.
So we start out with sort of our main down here.
And this is where main keeps all of its local variables.
There's not a whole lot of them in this case.
But it does have a return value. It's going to put together and
do that. So it's got its own stack frame.
Everybody has one.
It calls factorial 5.
So the things that we need in a stack frame is a place to hold
our local variables, which is, in this case,
let's call it n, and then the value that we're going to
return.
And so in this first case, when I call factorial 5, There's a
five there, and I don't know what the return value is yet I
don't have it because I'm gonna multiply five by whatever I get
back from this call the factorial four so Factorial four
goes on the stack there. It keeps its own value waiting
to have something to return
Factorial three keeps its own value and you can see now why I
have to have the stack frame because this Function needs to
know that when it comes back from the answer.
I got to multiply whatever I get by five Same as that other
invocation up above it says whatever I get back I've got to
multiply by three and since they have to keep separate values
This is why I need multiple stack frames here So I'm going
to stick my return value in on the left when I get it Factorial
one is still not a base case, so I get all the way up to
factorial zero
Right it gets called with a zero, but it also decides.
It's going to return one that one gets shipped back and
As that one comes down here Into the things that the previous
call has this stack frame comes off But the f1 says I'm gonna
multiply one by whatever I get back
so that's one times one and this frame comes off and I'll return
this value down below so the factorial two says I'll multiply
two by whatever you give me I'm gonna return two now that frame
gets popped off we return a two times
two right that's what I'm gonna
return I've got that I return the two down here two times
three that's what I'm really going for yeah that's it six
this frame gets popped off we return the six factorial forces
I multiply four by six this gives me 24 and I can return
that and then when it gets this here I got a 120 and this frame
comes off and main gets its response to what is factorial
five it's 120 in this case I don't think it does anything
with it but that's basically how stack frames work so you can see
that I needed this column here to be able to deal with
stuff.
If you look at inline four,
it says n times whatever comes back.
So even though the call to factorial of n minus one is the
farthest right thing on the very last line of code, it's still
not the last thing that happens.
The order of operation says I still have to multiply that.
So it looks as last as you can write it, but it isn't actually
last.
So that's why this one is not tail recursive,
why we need those stack frames.
So this is just an outline of how that works.
When a function call gets made,
all the local variables are saved in special stores, we call
that the program stack.
Then the new argument values for the function that's being called
are pushed onto the stack because the way that the
compiler builds the executable code, it says,
when you start function, you can expect that you will be given a
stack pointer and the first place you can go you can pop off
this argument and you can pop off this argument then you can
pop off this argument and you will have those as local
variables inside and that's how functions transfer information
between each other when one function calls another it says
here's the three four and whatever parameters I'm passing
to you I'm gonna push them onto the stack in the proper order
and the compiler has told you where to find them so They get
pushed onto the stack.
The function receives the call. It says, OK, well, I know I was
supposed to get three arguments.
One was four bytes, one was two bytes,
one was one byte. I can go pop four bytes and
stick that into a local,
pop two bytes and stick that into another local, pop one
byte, stick that into another local, and now I've got my
variables.
The function does its work.
And then it says there's one place where I was going to push
the return value so that when I get popped,
the previous function knows where that value is.
So when a return gets received at the call site, whoever called
the function,
says the return value is still on the stack.
I'm going to go pop that off, and now I have that return
value.
Save local variables, get restored, and then that function
moves on as if nothing ever happened.
So that's what happens here in the program stack.
If we need six calls, we need six sets of local variables.
We saw that.
There's only one program stack per thread.
If you write multi-threaded code,
each thread has its own stack because it's its own separate
execution trail.
But there's a distinction between the stack and the heap.
As we know,
the stack has things that go on and off in a very temporary
format, depending on the length of the function call, whereas
the heap gets some dedicated amount of memory that the entire
program has until the program is done.
That's why when we use dynamic memory, we put stuff up on the
heap,
and we can pass stuff on the heap from one function to
another,
because it stays on the heap and think of it as here's where my
stack is and then if I've got some stuff over there in the
heap I just need a pointer from something inside my stack
variable over to there and I can access that memory and then if I
want to pass that pointer on to some other stack frame I can and
the memory still lives so as long as you don't lose that
pointer the heap based memory can be used and reused
so there's only one heap while there may be multiple
stacks depending on if you've got a multi-threaded program.
A program stack size is fairly limited compared to the heap.
I mean we don't have a whole lot of problem with stack size.
We do have stack overflow as a thing.
One thing I would suggest you to do is write something that's
recursive that's not that you expect to crash.
Write something that you expect to crash because people ask me
all the time in office hours, well when's it gonna crash?
I say well I don't know.
I mean I've got a got a got a good idea.
I've got a better idea than you because I've crashed things and
that's the only way you're gonna get an idea.
You can't ask me how do I get an idea.
You have to write something that crashes.
Write something that crashes and then say well what happens if I
have twice as many local variables?
What happens if I got a couple of parameters in these many
local variables like what affects me running out of stack
space having a good internal feeling for that is gonna make
you better right just asking somebody what's the answer to
this problem is not going to give you that feeling so I don't
typically answer that type of question I say go write some
code I mean you can write something that's couldn't be
more than about ten lines in the ten lines you could get
something to crash great a main that calls that function.
I mean, we saw the whole factorial is up there done in
like six lines,
right?
Something like that.
What level of factorial can I not calculate because my stack
crashes?
You could even just use that code.
Play around with it, though.
Get a good idea of what stack overflow looks like.
And so it says here at the bottom,
a bottomless function will exhaust the program stack pretty
quickly.
So one of the reasons why, And I mean, you could solve this
sailing,
searching pirate program recursively.
Imagine if I'm trying to find the treasure,
as long as I haven't found it in this location here,
all I have to do is think of this as a smaller search that
starts here,
right,
and then recurse from there and continue like that.
The problem is the two-dimensional maps we give you
are too big. They are going to cause you to
overflow.
But a really small version, and you could rewrite this code to
be recursive. And as long as the maps aren't
too big, like certainly the spec map and the appendix map, you
could solve them perfectly recursively.
64 stack frames,
that's not gonna kill you.
But since we don't know how big the map's gonna be,
it's a good reason to avoid using recursion there.
So if you know how big it's gonna be, or you can do tail
recursion,
right? Because tail recursion doesn't require new stack
frames.
Tail recursion reuses the old stack frame over and over and
over again, so as the program gets to be very large,
the memory requirement stays the same.
And that's why we like tail recursion, yeah.
I was just wondering if you have tail recursion calls.
Mm-hmm. The tail recursion is happening
outside, other than,
like,
trying to, like,
outfit and everything that tail recursion or is there,
like, a tail recursion?
So if you've got, like,
if branch and at the end of that branch you recurse,
you're talking about sure right so you can have a
I think I might even have an example of that somewhere in
here let me see if I find it and then
I'll
show know about stack stuff so the compiler can at compile time
know how deep you're going to recur so it can't know that but
it does have to know the exact size of the stack frame right
and that's why C++ is so type specific you have to say I'm
gonna have this many variables that this many parameters this
is where their type is gonna be because as it compiles it says
okay OK, well,
this function here has got one incoming 32-bit
integer, and it's going to be returning a 32-bit integer.
So I can get by with the stack frame for this function being 64
bits, right? So it says,
when I call this function, I'm going to automatically go get an
8-byte stack frame.
And I know where to put the return value.
I know where to put the argument.
There's no locals.
so we're good to go after that.
So that's how the compiler knows the stack frame size.
At compile time you say,
okay,
what's going on with this one? This one's got the second one,
line six.
It's got a return value of four bytes.
It's got an incoming argument of four bytes, another incoming
four bytes. So I gotta have 12 bytes to make
this stack frame work
and that's how it does it.
All right, so we've got this recursive factorial function and
from the previous slide,
up here one through five.
Look down below it,
there's another version of a recursive factorial
call,
but this one is tail recursive.
Question?
Yeah.
Yes, so the question is if I pass a vector by value,
how does the compiler know? because it doesn't know how many
things are in there. But a vector is a data type that
uses dynamic memory.
So a vector is really always 24 bytes.
There's three pointers in a vector.
Here's where it starts,
here's where it ends, and then here's where the data ends.
And those three pointers, 24 bytes,
always make up a vector.
Now, the memory they point to over on the heap.
That can be 50 bytes or 5,000 bytes.
But on the stack,
the frame that keeps track of that vector, because when you
return a vector by value, It's still just saying,
here's these three pointers.
Make sure you get the stuff.
So is the amount of stack space available to me,
is that not sometimes different from device to device?
Yes, absolutely.
So the question is, does the amount of stack space differ
from device to device? And absolutely, because that's what
RAM is all about, right?
It can seem more infinite
because the machine can actually say, well, we've run out of
physical stack space. What we're going to do is we're
going to create some virtual stack space.
We'll write some of this stuff to disk, and then we'll pull
some stuff back out. So there's other tricks that go
on in the actual copper.
So you don't really have to worry too much about the
differences. I mean,
if you're going to be doing some fine-tuned programming, like
especially people that are doing a lot of work with embedded
systems,
embedded systems are notoriously lower resource devices, then
you've got to make sure that you're writing code specifically
for that.
So you're not going to run some Unreal engine on a small little
thumb-sized device. It's just the way it works,
right?
All right, so look at this one. This one is a recursive
factorial, Because it's saying that factorial is calculated in
terms of factorial of n minus 1, but inside of this call We're
actually multiplying Before we make the call So that n times
the result
Gets done here and then passed on to the smaller version
So if you look in line 9 you can see that the last thing that
happens is is the function call.
We're returning whatever the function call gets us.
So there's nothing in the second function that needs to be done
after the call.
This is what makes it tail recursive.
Because when I call this, for instance,
with n is five and result is one,
what happens?
It says,
well,
n is not zero, so we're not going to go there.
It says let's try calling factorial with NS4 and we start
with result one and we multiply that by five So I'm gonna call
this second one with factorial of four comma five
And I don't need the five and one anymore no one does
That's why the second call can reuse the stack frame.
It says well you were using N as five and Res as one
I'm perfectly fine with using NS4 and Resas5, and we haven't
lost any information, so I'll just move in to your house,
kick out the old garbage,
paint the rooms the color that I want,
and then live here long enough to get my math done,
and then pass on some new variables to the next call, and
that next call is gonna say, well, I don't like the color of
those rooms either. I'm gonna paint on my colors,
and then do my math and pass on, and nobody needs to keep track
of anybody's older colors because at the very end,
we're going to say, whatever this return gives me,
right?
At one point, I'm going to call this,
and it's going to say, you know what?
The first parameter is zero.
So I'll be here, and I'll return the result with no additional
math. So then the result is just
sitting there
where it was always going to be.
So this is how tail recursion works.
and we say it's equivalent to iteration because it has the
repetition of iteration,
but iteration doesn't use stack frames,
and tail recursion doesn't use multiple stack frames either.
Iteration uses one stack frame.
It doesn't use multiple stack frames.
So that's what tail recursion is about, and you can see here on
our analysis.
The recursive one that's regular recursion uses a linear time
complexity and a linear number of stack frames.
If N is 50, I gotta have 50 stack frames.
If N is 25, I got 25 stack frames.
I come down here in this tail recursive version, same time
complexity, still linear,
but now it can save and reuse that one stack frame, so it's a
constant space complexity because of that reuse.
And so that's why it's equivalent,
because we could write that as,
you could write this as a, I got a version of this in a,
An iterative version, you could write a function.
Start out at one,
multiply by the next number, multiply the next number,
multiply the next number.
Do that in a loop until you get to what you wanted to.
You could write that iteratively pretty easily.
All right.
So we had a question here about what happens if I got a branch
with recursion inside of it. How does that work?
Looks like that.
So here I've got this logarithmic tail recursive power
function.
Remember this is the one where we said if it's zero, we're just
going to return one.
If it's an even number,
I'm going to calculate that and multiply the value by itself.
If it's an odd number,
I'm going to take the floor or integer division and take that
hassle.
Nine turns into four times four times x.
So here it is. This is that in the tail
recursive version. You see we've had to move some
work into the function? calls, but we don't have to do the work
after the function calls.
So if it's even,
I just say, well, the power of x is just x to the n is just x to
the n over 2 times x to the n over 2.
And then when it's odd, I need to have one additional
multiplication by x,
and that flows in there to where I multiply the result by in
there. So your question was can I have
a branch where I've got recursion in it and still have
it be tail recursive and it is because I get to the end of one
of these branches every time
and as long as the last thing I do in any one call is either a
base case or a recursion
then it's tail recursive.
Well this is tail recursive even though there's multiple places
that I can recurse from.
So it looks like it's logarithmic in time and constant
in space.
So our practical considerations are the program stack is
limited,
it's pretty easy to exhaust it, you should try it.
For large data sets, simple recursion is a bad idea, or if
you don't know how large it's gonna be because the user could
determine how long it was gonna be, then that would be an unsafe
way. If you knew what the size was
gonna be and you knew what your hardware was roughly gonna be
like, and it was small enough, you could write something that's
basically recursive.
But if you can write it as tail recursive,
why wouldn't you?
So when,
the last thing, the question is, is it tail recursion if most of
them end with it? Or,
so we'll be looking at a function later
where it processes a tree, right?
And so there's gonna be a left call and a right call.
So if the left call is followed by the right call,
the left call can't be tail recursive.
But the right call can be tail recursive
because nothing happens after the right call.
So as long as nothing happens after it, it can be recursive.
But anytime that there's more work to be done, that's going to
create a stack frame. So a function can be partially
tail recursive.
Yeah.
All right. So I don't know what happened.
and the slides got updated and I'm not a fan of them.
So I went back to the older slides from last semester and
each one of them has this QR code here.
So this is the link to the playlist videos we call them.
These are the ones I made that are all studio videos
of these lecture sections.
So everything that goes between a slide like this and a slide
like that,
the whole thing, if you just wanna read about,
watch the video on tail recursion, it's there.
You can click on that.
It's also, if you look at the schedule of topics, There's a
column that's talking about the lectures and it says playlist.
You click on that playlist, it'll be all of the videos
that make up today's entire lecture.
So you can go look at these one at a time.
It's great for studying near the end, or if you wanna binge watch
because the season was already released,
you can do that as well.
So check these out if you need to.
Plus when it comes time to do some studying,
you don't have to watch the whole hour and 20 minute long
video if you only want to know about recurrence relations all
right so each one of these is a little different hard to tell
but they are reading QR codes it's fun all right so
recurrence relations we've seen these before right this is a
power so we know what the mathematical version that is X
to the end is just X times X to the n minus 1 we saw how the
recurrence relation can look like this in time,
the T of N.
If I go with a non-tail recursive version,
the M of N expression looks just like the T of N expression.
Because how do I calculate it? The memory needed is the stack
frame for one call
plus the N minus 1 other calls.
And each one of those needs the stack frame for one call plus
the n minus one other call. So this is what it looks like
when our memory requirement looks exactly like our time
requirement.
So you can see how we already determined that this T of n is
equal to T of n minus one. That's always gonna be linear.
Well, if m of n is in the same format,
that's gonna be linear as well.
Asterisk down here says non-tail recursive.
This is a non-tail recursive version.
The tail recursive version just looks like m of n is equal to c
sub zero,
right?
Some constant amount.
Logarithmic, we looked at this one.
Any time I'm dividing my data in half and only working on half of
it,
I'm going to get this structure, T of N is equal to T of N over
two plus some constant amount of work.
So this fits things like binary search and things like that.
So this is a table of them.
The ones that we derived in class were these two, right? We
did T of N over two. We did T of N minus one.
Those are common.
They'll always be big O of log N,
big O of N.
Look at the one in the third row.
The third row is the one we talked about.
We didn't actually look at it.
So what if I divide it into two and I process both sides,
right?
That's what it says. If T of N is T of N over two,
that's half of the data but I'm gonna work on this half times
two, the other half,
that's all of the work. So t of n over 2 in the
recurrence relation still looks like linear, but it's because
we're multiplying by 2 there This 2 makes that whole thing
linear. So we see that one.
We should know that it's linear
We asked the question about this previously I said what if there
is a non constant amount of work to be done Every time I go
through
Right, so if you look at this fourth one, it says t of n minus
1 plus c1 times some non-constant amount of work.
So now I can multiply by an n amount of work.
Because if it was a bigger constant,
c1 would just be c1,
c1,
but it would still be c1, right?
Now I'm saying if there's more work to be done, so this is
like, every time I've got to process this,
so at, let's say at factorial 5,
what if I had to go look get one, two, three, four, and five,
right?
I'm looking for some mastery number.
Is one, two, three, or four, or five, is it in there? Nope, it's
not, okay, then now we can call it with four.
Now that I'm inside four, I gotta go check, one, two, three,
four, are one of them the magic number? So that's me doing some
additional processing at every level, so it's not just like
five times n minus one.
It's five plus checking one, two, three, four, five plus the
call to n minus one.
If that happens,
I'm looking like something that's n squared,
which makes sense if you think about it.
Let's say I'm at five,
and I do work on one, two, three, four, five, and then I
call it with four, and I do work on one, two, three, four,
and then I call it with three, and I do work on one, two,
three.
So when I've done five work plus four work plus three work plus
two work,
that's the classic quadratic profile.
I'm doing all the work for every individual point.
So that one's there,
and then we say, Well, what if we're dividing by two and
processing all of them, right? So this is cutting it in half,
but multiplying by two. So I'm still processing all of
them, plus I'm doing a non-constant amount of work
every time as well.
This one ends up with this n log n profile.
So we still feel some logarithmic love there.
But this is where we get some of our sorts and our...
These are all sorts that are listed up here, but there are
other things that also do things like this.
So,
selection sort,
insertion sort,
bubble sort, they're all n squared because they're doing
that kind of thing.
Merge sort and quicksort,
they're n log n because they're doing that kind of thing.
And we'll see those when we get to sorts in a couple of
lectures.
regular than the regular what okay so in
selection sort we haven't talked about it but in selection sort
the basic is I've got to go find the smallest item and move it to
the front right so if I got 15 items to sort I got to look
through all 15 of them find the smallest item move it to the
front now got 14 items to sort.
So I got to look at all 14 of those, find the smallest item,
move it to the front, and then I got 13 items to sort.
So I get less work to do, but it takes me a linear amount of work
to get to the next step.
Whereas in factorial or power, we're doing a constant amount of
work. Just subtract one.
I'm ready to go to the next level.
Now I got to subtract one and I got to look at all of the items
before I can determine,
before I can move on to working the next level.
And so that's what this is representing.
If you've got to work on everything before you move to
the next level,
that's the non-constant amount of work.
And so selection sort does that in the way that selection sort
works.
And I'll show you more on selection sort in a bit.
Can you put it on the bottom though?
Why isn't it just n squared? It looks like it's n squared,
right? Because this is,
Well, if you look at it,
T of N,
two times T of N over two,
these two things are kind of equivalent.
I see what you're saying.
So why isn't it that they're equivalent here and they're
exactly the same, right?
But it has to do with the fact that N over two is jumping down.
Right, so I would have done,
in this version, I'll do,
with 15,
I'll call this with c times 15,
c times 14,
c times 13,
c times 12, whereas if I start with c times 16, I'll call this
with c times 16,
then I'll call it with c times eight, and then I'll call it
with c times four,
and two, and one, so I don't actually hit all of those in
between there, so it doesn't end up being n times n, it's n times
log of n.
Yeah.
Yeah,
yeah, because this is complete, This is come this is
contributing the same amount as that is right.
These two terms are contributing the same amount of work But
these two terms do a different amount of work.
Yeah
All right, so these are some common ones
Some common ones that you should know if your occurrence relation
shows up and it's one of these five We don't even have to do
any algebra. Just say okay.
I remember those That's something I'm familiar with boom
it comes in there
So we talked about some substitution method we did this
already
We already did these as well right what if we cut it into
three problems, and we process one piece We said that's gonna
be big O
Always messing with me always messing with me
So we said this was going to be big old log base 3 of n,
and then we said this was going to be big O of n, and then the
other one was something that's somewhere in between,
right? And this was a big O of log
n, no, not,
yeah,
n to the log base 3 of 2.
something like that and then
this was the question what if there was a an additional non
constant work after the recursion and that's what we
looked at when we saw this is what I call a non constant
amount of work included with the recursion so they affect things
there all right recurrence Congratulations.
Wrapped up.
Onwards and upwards.
To the master theorem.
This is also going to make our life easier.
Remember the master theorem from 2003?
We're going to use a very similar, just slightly
simplified version of it.
We don't have to solve everything like 203 solves the
world's problems.
We just program a bit.
All right. So here's the master theorem in
a very, very math density slide,
right?
Densely mathy slide. I don't know I'm using some bad
language here, but if I've got T of N as some monotonically
increasing function meaning it doesn't go down
has to satisfy This setup T of N is equal to a some
constant times T of N over B Some other constant plus
some F of N and F of N has to be a polynomial function
polynomial where the largest power is some constant which
we'll call C.
So with these three variables A, B and C and their restrictions
are A has to be greater than or equal to 1 because that's what
I'm multiplying the T by.
So if A is less than 1 you can imagine that's actually shaving
things down.
If A is 1 it just leaves it there.
If A is larger than 1 it's doubling or tripling it, or even
1.5-ing it,
it's doing something in there. So a has to be greater than or
equal to one,
b has to be greater than one, because this is what I'm
dividing by. If I'm not dividing by something
greater than one, I'm not making my work smaller.
If I'm dividing by one, it's not getting smaller.
If I'm dividing by less than one,
it's actually getting bigger.
So it has to be greater than one for b,
and then f of n, as I said,
this n to the c is how we represent this function.
So if you've got those three variables, Then when I see a
function that looks like that, I can just plug them in to this
nifty little piece of thing that you Absolutely have to write on
your cheat sheet because I don't remember it.
I've taught this class This is my 30th time and when I want to
do this
I'll look it up somewhere. I might remember one or two of
them The top one and the bottom one are pretty easy, but I just
want to deal with it so write this down because it says if I
take those three constants a A, B, and C, and combine them, and
compare A and B to the C,
I'm going to get my answer. So if A is greater than B to the
C,
I can just write this. And I don't even have to do
anything with the substitution thing and trying to algebra my
way out of it.
If A is greater than B to the C, I go there.
If A is less than B to the C, I'm here at the bottom.
And in the middle, when A and B to the C are equal,
I've got that.
Make sense?
So looking at it, it says if a is less than b to the c,
it looks like the polynomial term dominates,
right? Because the answer is just n to the c.
So if the multiplicative factor of
the recurrence portion is smaller than what the B to the C
brings,
then it's just the polynomial.
Reverse that,
if the multiplicative factor applied is larger than
this polynomial,
then we're just concerned with the recursive part.
So all I'm looking at is n to the log base b of a because it's
how those things work log base b
and Then finally if they're equal then we get to sort of
combine the two effects, right? I can see the end to the C is in
there and here's the log of n in there So let's look at some
examples.
So here's a perfect one.
What's a
B
C, that's right,
so three, two, and one,
and A is three, B to the C is two,
so A is greater than B to the C,
which looks like this.
A is greater than B to the C, so all I have to do is say that my
answer is gonna be three,
so the answer comes down here,
right?
N.
I got that wrong.
What am I doing? A times A is greater than B to the C.
So I should have been at the first one.
I was right.
All right. So, yeah, this is what my answer
is to me.
Aye, aye, aye.
All right.
N to the log base B of A.
Right? And we can see it here.
We go through there.
Because A is greater than B to the C, we just plug in and we
get this.
That's our answer,
right? That would have been a whole lot harder
to algebra-tize if I was gonna try to do a substitution thing
on that beast.
I've been here for a long time with a lot of eraser crumbs,
digital or otherwise.
All right,
what's up next?
A is,
B is,
C is,
one half, right? So A,
B,
C,
B to the C is now equal to a
Four to the one-half is the square root of four that's two
two is equal to two so I can come right down the middle and
say that my answer is just
N
To the one-half square root of n log n
And that's easy, so this is how we use the master theorem in 281
There's a third example
What might you imagine that's gonna be?
when A is less than B to the C, right?
So these are things that you should be doing when you're
studying,
when you're learning,
and also when you're examining,
right? It can help you find patterns.
So finding patterns can help you score, right?
Okay, I already got a question about this and a question about
that.
Where am I missing questions?
So here,
we're looking at this one. I've got A is one,
B is two,
C is also two, so B to the C,
two to the two,
four, is greater than one,
a is less than b to the c, I take this bottom version and you
can see,
right,
looking at this all by itself, what would you say?
That contributes log n.
Looking at this all by itself, what does it contribute?
N squared.
Obviously that dominates.
So the answer here, I mean, even without the master theorem in
the two outer cases,
it's actually pretty easy.
Without the master theorem I can say, oh yeah, this is just n
squared,
right? And if I back up a couple of slides here,
exercise one, what's going on here? So now here is where we
said
that three is greater than two to the one.
So really it's this term that's doing all the work,
which makes sense, right? Because if it was two times T to
the N over two, that would be linear.
It's three times, so it's even more work.
So obviously that's gonna be more work than just that linear
function that follows.
So solving that is all I need to do and then when they come
together That's when you've got to sort of get a multiplication
of the two of them And what do they actually do and what did I
figure out?
This portion right here contributes square root of n
Right, and this is something that looks logarithmic doesn't
it cut it into four parts?
deal with half of them, that ain't logarithmic, I don't know
what is.
As long as you're cutting it into some number of parts and
dealing with less than all of them,
it's some logarithmic base. And so,
you can see here,
it's a real simple combination of the things that we have.
That first part gives me something logarithmic,
the second part gives me square root of n,
I'm happy with square root of n log n.
So,
if you wanna be slick,
you don't even have to write this master theorem down on the
cheat sheet you can just sort of look at it
the
linear part does do a lot of stuff but
we do do some dividing half we'll look at mercer we'll look
at it when I see the full algorithm up on the screen it'll
be a lot easier to scribe so alright so that's the master
theorem in all three of the forms that we really care about
when you can't use it is when T of N is not monotonic so if
there's some sign going on there no good if F of N is not a
polynomial here we've got 2 to the N we can't use it then or if
we can't express it as some constant here B is not some
constant my dividing factor there's also a special fourth
condition that we can used but we will never use
so just kind of move on past that I'll show you in a second
but don't write it on your cheat sheet because it won't be on the
exam
so here's one I can't use it on right why can't I use it a is
fine and legal
C is fine and legal B is not I'm not dividing N by something so
the recurrence so the massive theorem doesn't help me solve
these linear ones it's gonna help me solve those tricky
logarithmic ones and stuff with powers in them that are more
complicated to deal with.
So the master theorem isn't applicable because B is not
greater than one. As long as I'm dividing by
something greater than one, I'm making less work for myself in
the future.
So here's the fourth condition.
If the F of N looks like this,
then the T of N looks like that.
It's fairly limited.
Like I said,
don't need to write it down. So here's an example.
Here's a perfectly good A as two,
perfectly good B as two, but now my function is not polynomial,
it's polylogarithmic,
so the normal version won't work.
If I've got something under that structure though, I can end up
with something like that. But that's the fourth condition
example,
leave it in the past.
It exists,
just those slides are there to keep the really smart kid in the
classroom with me and say well but what about yeah what about
it's on my slide leave you alone.
Yeah, go ahead
Not into any one we're not messing with any of that stuff
Let's try to keep this a little bit easier.
You can get into some more come complex analysis I mean, there's
certainly functions that generate behavior like that, but
none of the stuff that we're working with so
farther level or higher level of
Analysis in another course or another real-world
situation
All right, so here's our bonus friend of yours claims to have
discovered a revolutionary new algorithm for finding a maximum
element and unsorted array First you split the array into two
halves then you recursively find the maximum in each half
whichever half max is bigger That's the overall max Sounds
right.
You're cutting it in half. You're cutting it in half and
cutting in half. This is faster than linear
search it looks like a
logarithmic search
Is that possible?
If it was, we probably wouldn't be talking about linear search,
right, go ahead.
You're cutting it in half, but still processing both halves,
right?
You're doing a full processing of both halves, even though
you're recursing into process a half, you still do both halves.
So that's the same sort of thing as what if I divided it into 10,
and then I eat all 10 of them, well, you ate the whole pie,
you ate the whole thing, it doesn't matter.
All right.
That's the master theorem and videos to prove it.
2D table search. This one's a really fun one.
This is great for a job interview question.
And so I like to talk about this one because it's a really
straightforward problem, but it also shows one of the ways that
you can behave in job interviews that could be helpful.
A lot of times they'll give you a question and the questions are
really,
really,
really difficult.
You're not supposed to be able to solve all of them.
if you can solve it,
they obviously are going to hire you but most people won't be
able to solve it and they still want to know which one of those
people that they should hire as well so one of the ways that you
can do it is you can sort of develop your solution as you go
here so in this question I've got this two-dimensional table
and it can be m by n for the purposes of the slide m and n
are the same it's five by five but all I know is that the
numbers are always non-decreasing.
So as I move from left to right,
you see that they're increasing,
and I move from top to bottom,
you see that they're increasing.
So that structure is part of the constraints that I'm given,
it has to exist that way.
So now, how would I find the thing if I was given some value
to look for it?
Say we'll start with the easiest way, I can just look at all of
them, right?
This is what I would do,
say okay, I can get that written down in the paper, this is
version one,
I'll just do a linear search. There's n rows, there's n things
in each row.
That's n times n work.
Great.
Wait a minute.
They said that they were sorted,
so only an idiot would do a linear search on sorted data, so
I could do a binary search in every row,
log m work, but there's still n rows.
So I could do this.
So these are my two basic searches.
Version one, version two, great. Now let's see if I can go
faster.
Right,
I could go diagonally or like here I'm leveraging the power of
the binary search in one dimension how can I leverage the
binary search in two dimensions is that possible right so as I
move on here let's start with what we call this quad partition
I'm gonna divide this into four quadrants it's an odd number so
it looks kind of odd but let's go back and say we're looking
for the number 13 and you should say yeah there it I found it all
right you know it's there now if I go over here I'm still looking
for 13 what do I know about 13 if I go look at this thing in
these corners like if I've got a 9 here can 13 be in that
quadrant it's impossible everything that's in that
quadrant is less than or equal to 9 because I have to go up and
have to go left to get there so I can rule out the that 13 is in
there how about this 14 sure could be you can see
it and I know that I can go left from here and I can get to
smaller numbers I can even go down a bit as long as I can go
left after that I can get to smaller numbers so this one's
good this one's bad how about this 16 same sort of thing if I
go right I'm definitely not gonna find it right away but as
long as I go up some there's a chance for me getting to
something smaller than 16 so this one is a good quadrant to
search in this particular version the 17 doesn't actually
make me happy right I can rule out finding 13 here but that
third quarter that the fourth quadrant I should say that one
is going to be dependent on the numbers that you're searching
for right So I could find a version of this graph
where I can always,
let me say,
I can always rule out one corner,
one quadrant.
Depending on the numbers,
I may be able to rule out another quadrant.
So asymptotically,
I can see my worst case scenario is I will have to search three
of them.
Worst case.
I will never have to search four.
So I'm dividing it by two. I bet you thought that was a
little strange earlier when I said three times T of n over two
like How could you possibly divide something in half and
then process three halves?
But we're dividing n in two and n is the length of one side
so if I divide n into
Two that gives me four quadrants as long as I'm not processing
four of them.
I'm faster than linear
I'm some level of logarithmic so in this case this exact case 13
could show up there so let's pick some other number like how
about 21 like 21 could be in
this khaki quadrant it could be in the orange quadrant it could
be in the goldenrod quadrant but it could not be in the yellow
quadrant so it It could be in quadrants one,
three, and four, but not quadrant two,
21.
So I can't always rule one thing out,
I can't always rule two things out, but I never have to do four
things.
That's what this quad partition gives me.
So then I get this funky looking expression, I divide it by two
and I take three of them,
but it's true.
I cut the side in half,
and I have to deal with three of those four quadrants.
Because the end is the length of the side, not the size of the
quadrant.
All right.
So let's see if we can't simplify that, right?
So this is the first,
this is like the quad partition. This is not really a potential
solution. This is really potential
solution number three. But we already discounted the
linear one and the log linear one.
Well, let's get something faster here.
We'll have to figure out how fast this actually is.
Look at this version. This is a binary partition.
And this one does what that quad partition does, but it takes
this silver line down the middle.
It says this silver line I know to be sorted,
so I can go search for the value I want,
13,
in this silver line.
It ain't there.
Where would it be?
It would be somewhere here between 9 and 14.
that's where the 13 would be so if I find it in my partition
line great I found it if not then it tells me where my
partitions are for the other two sides now now my partition
starts there and goes below that on the left and only above that
on the right does that make sense so now with this version
if I do that binary search on that column then I can
absolutely say I can always reduce this to two
no more than two quadrants that I have to process
good
so this one looks like this now I'm down to two
quadrants two times T of n over 2 plus I've got to do some
amount of work there right I had to search to see if I could find
that 13 7 8 9 no Oh 14 so it's somewhere in between there
so this is the linear search to find 13 in the silver
once I've done that I know what my quadrants look like but
you say of course we already decided we were leaving the
idiots behind nobody's do linear search on sorted data
so why don't I binary search to figure out where that 13 would
be right if I did that then I could change that up and say
like the amount of work that I had to do for every full
quadrant that I'm investigating it's C log n
log n is give me the binary search to figure out where this
split is right so this version is a linear search this version
is a binary search
because
n is the length of the side right and is not the total
number of items so if n was a total number of items dividing
into the quadrants would be n over 4 but since n is the length
of a side and I cut it into halves that's what it is that's
why it's n over 2
Well, I know that I'm searching for 13,
and as I look through the column that I pick, and you can do this
both ways. You can pick it as a column,
you can pick it as a row,
you can even pick it as a diagonal.
But wherever I find that, it's going to be in there somewhere,
right? So maybe if the number that I was looking for was
between seven and eight, right,
then that would say I have to look in here and here.
So wherever it is, that lets me slide that quadrant focus into
what I have to look at,
right.
All right,
so here's our master theorem thing.
We see that with the quad partition,
that's this n to the log base 2 of 3.
That's pretty simple.
It's a little bit more than linear,
but it's definitely better than the n times n, which will be the
search,
the full linear search.
The binary partition looks like n log n.
That's pretty nice.
And then the improved binary partition, where we do the
binary search every time I've got work to do,
looks like I can get this done in linear time.
So as you're working your way through an interview, if you've
got an interviewer talking to you about what's going on with
your solution, you say, well, I started here with this linear
thing. I knew it was a binary search
that I could do, so I did an n log m.
But I knew I could apply that, and so I came up with this quad
partition thing, and I figured I could do something better than
that,
and so on, and then you could say, well, then I ran out of
time, so I would've probably tried to develop this in both
directions, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
So then they can hear your thought process.
Hear that you understand that there's work that needs to be
done.
Let's get the work done.
And then there's refinements that can occur
because you know that there's some refinements out there.
So use this as a method to solve your own problems and say, let
me just get the thing solved rather than sitting there with a
blank page in front of you that just doesn't work.
I mean,
you can take any one of our projects that we give you and do
the most ridiculous brute force solution and get the right
answer.
Great, now that I've got the right answer,
how do I tune that up, right? How do I do less work? How do I
do better work?
in the binary partition no we're dividing the length of the side
by two so then I've got these four quadrants I'm just picking
two of them in this improved binary partition
oh yeah both of my guests um yes but I mean that's that's a
that's a minus one right and we're talking about that's a
constant factor really so if you think about what I've got a big
M I've got a big N or big M like a thousand sure I can take one
out of the middle and then I've got $4.99
to $4.99 and that's pretty much like n
over 2 so this is just sort of like a hand wavy way to get past
the math on there it still works right it's close enough so the
question is because there's that silver column shouldn't that n
over 2 be like n over 2 minus 1.
And should,
T of n over 2 minus 1 is on the order of T of n over 2, though.
So that's why it's good.
Good enough.
All right.
And oh,
there's one more. There's one more solution here.
And this one's kind of fun.
This one says,
what if I used something more
in terms of making decisions? So now from trying to find 13,
I could start here. Let's start in the upper right
corner. And what do I know if I'm
looking for 13?
I know that I'm not going to go down from here, right? Because
going down would be going up from 15.
So let's go to the left.
Well, at 11, I certainly don't want to go left anymore because
that just gets smaller. So let's turn and go down.
At 12,
if I go down, it's a bad thing.
So I'll go left.
At 8 is not enough, I'll go down.
Nine is not enough. I'll go down 14 is too much.
I go left And I find it This is a stepwise linear
solution and I can find it as long as I start in the top right
or bottom left corner If I start in the bottom right corner, I'm
looking for 13. I'm at 30 which way should I go?
Both ways should work or could work but both ways could be
wrong So I'm not guaranteed to find it if I start here same
thing as starting in the upper right hand corner I'm at one.
I know that I've got to go down or right to get to 13 I just
don't know whether I should go down or right
We went left at 12 because
Right, you're right I did that wrong didn't I that's why I have
an animation here keep me from talking and making mistakes
right
You're right, you should have gone through 12.
I should have gone through 12.
That's better.
Sorry for the confusion there.
Make sense?
At 12,
I know that if I go left,
I might find it,
but I might have missed it, because it's down below me, so.
At 12, I should have gone down until I hit the 16 to tell me to
go left. So that's the real path.
It looks like I got it right.
Yes?
Right,
yes, exactly.
Well,
I never go right because I've probably already come from
right,
right? I guess you could go right at 19,
but then where would I go from 19,
right? If I go 12 and I'm trying to increase to go right to 19,
that's a great plan because it's got to be bigger than 12.
And I know going right from 12 is going to get me to bigger.
But if I run into something that's too big,
the only way I could go is back to the left.
So I could have gone 15, 11, 12, 19,
12,
16,
right?
So I think the decision there is to just always go with the way
that's going to make sure that you only have to do one turn.
because,
for instance,
the 13 couldn't be below 15. I already knew that.
So to duck back under something that I already knew was too big,
I'm never going to find it there.
So I'm always gonna go over there and then have to turn
around and come back.
Yeah.
The worst case run time is N plus M,
right? Exactly right.
Worst case run time is N plus M, right? Because I could go from
here all the way to there. Worst case, if I was looking for
18, it would be n plus m.
And that is why we call it linear, though, because it's
still the size of the side plus the size of the side.
So it's worst case,
stepwise linear.
All right, so this is a pretty fun example.
It's been fully hashed out in Geeks for Geeks.
You can go check it out.
This one runs a million searches in each of the ways with n and m
equal to 100,
and you can see the average runtime.
And we looked at the binary search.
We looked at quad partition, binary partition.
We looked at the stepwise linear search, and then the improved
binary partition, where we have the silver column that we binary
searched to find the divider in.
That's our fastest one here.
The one we didn't talk about was a diagonal binary search.
It's got the same kind of flow to it,
but because of the diagonal stuff, it's just a little
clunkier.
So that one got,
that slide got deleted at some point.
Alright,
so,
that wraps up 2D table search.
Questions for writing exam questions.
That's what these are.
It says questions for self-study.
We need to do some questions.
Need to write some questions.
Consider a recursive function that calls only itself.
How can you replace recursion by a loop?
and an additional stack,
right? Things like that.
So this was the thing that we should be doing.
Like we need some more practice exam questions.
Go to the forum.
Write a question about today's stuff.
Write a question about yesterday's stuff.
Every time you're riding on the bus, start thinking about, I'm
on my way to lecture.
Like what happens?
What happens? You know what I love to talk about, right?
I love to talk about sports. I love to talk about music.
You don't just like show up at the game and start shooting,
right?
You got warm-up time. They get to the game an hour and
a half early.
So when you're on the bus, you're walking across campus,
you're on your way to 281,
your mind needs to be getting in the 281 frame.
You don't want the first 281 thought you have is to be me
opening my mouth for you,
right? You need to be getting it together.
So while you're walking to class,
think,
okay,
what did we talk about last time?
How could I prove that I know what we talked about last time,
I would answer a question like this.
Write a question, or do the same thing, you don't have to do as
much cool down work to get out of a lecture, I'm fine with
that.
But,
warm up time,
be thinking about something.
Come up with something.
Write me an exam question.
Submit it at this forum,
I'll pull you all,
it's at this point, it's only like,
It's an embarrassingly small number of questions, so that's
why I haven't done it for you yet.
But if you write some more questions,
I'll be able to bring you something.
We get this done here in a week or so, and then we'll have some
little practice exam.
We'll recap it and see what we think of it.
All right,
so there we go.
Discard.
That gets me out of this lecture anyway, right? There we go.
Six, arrays and containers.
Let's go. Look at that.
There's some ancient technology. looks like RAM.
Arrays.
You know arrays.
So as we talk about things in this course,
say you need to understand how C arrays work,
you need to understand how multi-dimensional arrays work,
you need to understand pointers,
and including function pointers, you need to understand how those
things work.
You also need to understand how C strings work and the functions
that work on them.
But when we're in 281,
we're going to avoid almost all of that.
So we're going to avoid C arrays and instead use dynamic memory.
That's where the C++ vector comes in.
We could use the array standard array, but the difference is the
standard array is much more like the C array in that you have to
know at compile time what the size is going to be.
So the template in array,
this is what I'm going to stick in there, and this is the size
of the container that I'm making.
So it is not dynamic.
Standard array doesn't grow like a regular array doesn't grow.
You want something to grow? That's what vectors are for.
Avoid pointers where possible. We like to use containers,
function objects,
and indices or iterators to get through that.
Avoid pointers just to understand how that kind of
stuff works.
And then, of course, use C++ string objects.
They can do a lot for you. There's some courses that don't
let you do this stuff.
It's great.
Use them when you can.
So here's a fun one, too.
Look at this code here.
We've got a double array of doubles named a that's
being initialized to 1.1, 2.2,
3.3.
We've got this integer i that's equal to 1.
Line c says let's index a at i, but line 4 says let's index a at
i. Line 5 says, let's index i at a.
So the question is,
what happens here?
Compiler error,
doesn't compile.
Runtime error,
compiles but crashes.
Or neither.
Looks like a compiler error.
Definitely bad.
Turns out,
it's totally legal.
Why?
Because square brackets notation is what is known as syntactic
sugar.
Syntactic sugar is something that is easy and sweet to write
and might do something a little bit more nefarious than that.
So if you look at it, it says here,
A square brackets I really converts to dereference A plus
I.
Like go to the base address,
add this many offset,
and then dereference what you have there.
That's all square brackets does.
Imagine if we had to write this expression here every time we
wanted to get something out of an array or a vector.
Definitely sweeter.
Syntactic sugar.
So in that case then,
I square brackets A just converts to D reference I plus A
Which is the same?
So the math comes out and this will compile today on your GCC
and work just like that I mean the warning flags might throw
you off to get enough warnings on there.
Somebody will reject this But without the warning flags, it's
perfectly legal code Yeah
Well,
A is not a double.
A is the array of doubles.
So in reality, we think of that as being the base address of
where those things start. So A is the base address and
then one is the offset.
Well, I'm saying dereference what's at that location,
right? It's like go to this location and add this many to
it,
right? So whatever that is, I mean, it might be like XFF42 or
something like that, right?
It says go there,
and then when we,
that's what A is.
A is something like that. And then if I is something like
four,
then really all we're doing is saying let's just dereference
OXFF46. And that's fine, that's
some value.
Right, in this case,
i is one, right, but i is four bytes,
because we're talking about double pointers.
i plus one, I should say.
Because i is one,
when i plus one, right,
because this a,
really what happens is this A decays to a double pointer.
It means it thinks it's a pointer.
So when I plus one on a double pointer, it doesn't move over
one memory cell, it moves over the size of a double.
And that's why,
starting at this address here, plus the size of a double, which
is a really bad address,
coming up with numbers at the top of my head.
So let's go with something that makes a little bit more sense.
because they would be, they would be
word-oriented.
So here,
that number would look like that.
It's just the way the math works,
right?
Because it knows I'm doing a plus one in this data type,
right,
it says my data type is double pointer,
plus one to this means add one doubles worth of space double
is eight bytes this for zero turns into four eight so if I
turn around and do the same thing and say let's add one to
this 48 it works so this is what is going on
there this is obviously not skills that you need but it's
information that you do need this is how square brackets
works
I
had a is still the same thing I is I had a is a is still this
hex FF 40 right because when I say hex FF
40 like in here the compiler says what am I adding I'm adding
I and a and their biggest type is double pointer so I'll think
of a as a double pointer and I'll think of this one as a
double pointers value so when I add 8 and 40 it's the same as
adding 40 and 8 and end up at 48 either way then when I
dereference it I get that second number
so it's just a little fun and games not
really anything you're gonna be tested on but understanding
what's going on when we see syntactic sugar is worth it.
How does that work if you can overload the index operators?
The question is, how does that work if you can overload the
square brackets operator?
So the same sort of thing.
We've got some math that's going on there.
So in a C++ object,
though,
if you put on a square brackets there,
that value gets passed as a function to that argument.
So it works on the built-ins because it's a double and it's
integers, but if you've got a class where you've defined
square brackets yourself,
then that integer is gonna be passed to the square brackets
function,
and so it doesn't do that tricky stuff.
All right, so here we go.
An array here, we've got a character array, not to be
confused with a C-style string. Character arrays are what C
strings are, but character arrays have a guarantee
that there's always gonna be a trailing null.
And you see here, I don't have a null.
So this is not a C-style string. This is really a C-style array
of characters.
Very, very slight difference between the two.
You can square brackets to set something in there.
You can read from square brackets.
Here I can take a C character pointer,
P,
and set that equal to A. Remember,
A is my array
type.
So I can set a pointer to an array type.
And this is where decay comes along and we say that arrays can
decay into pointers and that's really confusing.
But you see I can set a pointer equal to that array address.
So basically it's saying A represents the base address of
an array of characters, and so I can take this address and stick
it into a pointer, which is a place to hold addresses.
In line 10,
you can see we've set P to point to the address of the second
item.
A square brackets 1 is the second item, The address of that
I can use that a pointer there. So there's how we can advance P
there I could have also to get from here to there.
I could have also just said Plus plus P.
I've done the same thing Move me one character along
All right, so arrays give us random access and constant time
the indexing always starts at zero now Hopefully, you know
why?
Because A is also the address at the beginning of it.
So A square bracket zero is the same as asking for A.
If everything started at one,
we'd have,
this is where the memory starts, we have the plus one to get
there and a minus one,
and we'd always be minusing one everywhere.
There's no bounds checking too, that's what the key to C style
arrays is. You really had to keep your
stuff.
You declare an array, you keep its size somewhere.
Because you have to get at it. That's why vectors are so nice.
They'll tell you how much space they have.
You just ask them, hey, what's your size?
How much capacity do you have? I know when I've written off the
end of it. And if I'm just using pushback,
I don't even care if I'm over the size.
It'll work out.
But with C-style arrays, you've got to keep that stuff
all well under control there.
So here are a couple of fixed-size arrays.
You look at this one on the left.
It's a 1d array the one on the right.
That's a 2d array and you can see the little red boxes How
they get declared the 1d array I can declare that just like type
name square brackets size of
Dimension over here. I got type name square brackets
number of rows square brackets number of columns
So when I do that I get the white sort of boxes up there
those are what my memory look like Logically don't worry about
how it looks physically physically.
It's just a big wrong, but logically it looks like that
The so a
2d array as you see it here We've got this Sort of index
that we can find by taking the row times the number of columns
and then adding the column to it and finding that location,
right? So I can use these two values here,
index plus row and column to go back and forth between the 1D
version and the 2D version,
right? Because if I was to use this math, I say, well, I wanted
to find this row and column,
row one, column two, that value is five.
If I do this math, it says,
oh yeah, all you have to do is just look that up at this
location,
five, and that's where you'll find it.
So it is a bit of an abstraction, really.
That's what's going on there.
I can do this with one memory operation.
I don't have to say, let me go find this container and then
look inside of that container.
What I was most wondering is whether or not it's represented
in contiguous memory. That's what I'm saying.
It is represented in contiguous memory, linearly.
That's why I said this is a logical representation of it.
it's not the physical representation of it.
Physical representation of it's still
just a straight list of values.
All right, so this one here does some work on filling this.
You can see these are fixed size arrays.
In line two I declare this array that's two dimensional.
I have to use constants there. So it looks like they're
variables because rows and columns are up there.
But rows and columns are actually declared as const in
the line up above them. So that's why I can use
something that looks like text and not numbers.
It has to be either a declared constant
or a literal in order to declare a C-style array.
So for indexing in to like a two dimensional array,
does this mean it's never going to be faster
than it's going to be in a two dimensional array?
Yes, you have to do the math yourself.
So the question is, is it faster than doing something in a 2D
vector, right? A 2D vector requires two memory accesses.
Like one access to say,
find me the vector that this is in.
OK, well, it's in this vector over here.
Great.
Now that I'm there,
find me the fifth item in this vector and it's the second
memory access.
Whereas if it's the 2D array style,
those things are all just contiguous in memory.
So I do one math operation,
that plus the columns times the row times the column size.
I do that math operation, then I go to that location,
and I get that thing in one memory access.
So you can get some more speed out of that.
It's painful to look at in your code when you're always doing
all the math yourself.
You gotta wonder,
like, am I getting a minor,
minor fraction of a second to having this one memory access
versus two? So if you have to have some super performant code,
then you're gonna start loading your caches in particular ways
and making sure you use only one-dimensional vectors and
things like that.
But in general, we can just code in a readable way.
And not worry about how much it costs us, yeah.
So we're applying time to time and just look like R times like
relative time to follow up with what?
Yes, that's exactly right. So this statement right here,
because at compile time, we know what cols is.
That's important, that's why it's a constant.
At compile time, we know what this is.
The compiler can say,
what sugar am I gonna turn this into?
The compiler says, well, since I know how many columns there are,
I can take this rc,
multiply it, and then go to that location.
So that's how this turns into a single memory operation because
even though it looks the same as the next slide, it actually gets
compiled differently.
Absolutely,
absolutely.
You keep doing the multiplications and modding
things off and yeah,
absolutely.
It's crazy,
but that's how it works. The compilers are good for
things.
Yes, a 2D standard array is still using
dynamic memory. I think those are still in
dynamic memory, right?
And so your 2D standard array is still going to be an array of
arrays. I don't have to mess around with
2D standard array.
I don't have to mess with that. Let's do that.
I'll look into that one, give you a better answer.
So right before we got out of here, this is 1150.
This is the different version of it.
This is the pointer-to-pointer version of it.
So this is now more dynamic memory-based.
So you can see up there,
I'm saying, hey, give me the number of rows and give me the
number of columns because I'm not at compile time setting this
up. I am at run time saying,
well,
give me a new square brackets,
give me a list of integer pointers.
And so that line in four gives me this white column here which
is a bunch of pointers to integer pointers, right? So then
in this next one here, line seven and eight,
that's where I give me those new square brackets to get the
actual containers to hold the integers.
So now you can see how this version here
can't necessarily know how many columns are in each array
because it's a runtime thing.
So this one compiles,
even though it looks exactly like the previous slide, it
compiles to something totally different.
It says,
well first,
go look in A at this location. That'll tell you where to go and
when you get there look at this location in that thing So if I
do one comma two, it'll say a says there I access one go over
to there I'm in the three four five then get me two out of
there two memory accesses. So same code for filling
same code for reading But I've got to do this additional work
here. It gives me some additional
flexibilities. It gives me runtime flexibility.
I I can even say I don't even need to have every row be the
same length. I want to do this triangular
matrix. I could have the top row be 50
and then 49 and 48 and 47, 46.
I could do that if I wanted to with this version because at
runtime I'm making them all, whatever size I choose them to
be, they're in line 48. That sets my row size.
All right.
So we'll pick up at
some stuff here with 2D arrays when we get back on Thursday.
