That's

better.

Mm-hmm, mm-hmm, mm-hmm.

All right, there's our minute,

10.30.

Today I did walking and smiling.

So the whole way over here from Beister on the outside,

I just walked,

smiled all the way over.

It's pretty good. The combination of smiling with

other body motion might be something in that.

I'm gonna look into it.

But let's start there.

We'll smile first,

then we'll talk to ourselves.

So you ready?

Count of three,

two,

one.

And that's it. See how easy that was?

Next up,

it's important for you to say

I'm smart enough to do well in this course.

Say it.

You've got to tell somebody else, too, you're smart enough

to do well in this course.

Oh, yes, it feels good. Now,

the other thing that's kind of really important,

certainly important to you,

is the exam.

It's good to know right now,

it's gonna suck.

It's not gonna be great, it's not gonna be great.

We don't try to write them as hard.

We go back and we just sort of try to make the questions easier

and then we say, okay, well let's just make them easier than

that and then we get to the point where like,

we can make them any easier than this, we just might as well just

give them the points away and then we end up with a, like a 60

median.

It's just a hard subject.

So right after the midterm and a bunch of people have done

horribly,

I often get them coming up to me and saying,

how can I study for the final? I felt like I was here.

I was paying attention maybe.

Maybe I felt like I studied really hard.

I studied a whole bunch of hours,

whatever.

All kind of stories, or maybe I just didn't think it was gonna

be that hard so I didn't study. now I know I need to study for

the final.

What's the best way that I can study for this course?

And the best way to study for this or anything

is all along the way.

It's good to be able to tune it up at the end, little cram

session,

but you're gonna do better if you study all along the way.

And the cool part about the exam is it's only 24 multiple choice

questions.

Just 24 multiple choice questions.

That's it, well there's two free response questions.

But on the multiple choice side,

there's just 24 of those.

So then you ask, well, where do those questions come from?

The staff writes those questions,

not the faculty,

the staff.

That means the IAs and the GSI write the questions.

The faculty goes over them, we tune them up, and we have

discussions and pre-writes where they have half of the staff

don't even see the test until it's about ready, and then they

take the test and add more feedback, and they tune these

questions up. But the key takeaway there is,

these questions are written by students like you,

right?

We're in the second semester of the year, so we didn't really do

any mid-year hiring,

but about a third of the staff comes on new every school

year. So that means that in the fall

semester,

they had half a semester's more 281 experience

than you did,

because they finished and you're at the midterm.

Now they're at one and a half semesters more experience than

you are, which is to say,

not much more.

They're one semester ahead of you, and then there's me,

right? I've been doing this for decades.

totally different,

what's good is you can be as good as they are.

When they get here,

their first exam that they have to write for,

they have to write,

sorry you have to write for them,

first exam they have to write,

it's the first time they've written questions unless they

followed my advice,

right?

And

here's

the from the material it's really easy to look at and be

like oh yeah I understand that yeah yeah yeah I know that

I got that and you say okay I don't even know what I'm

studying here that was just a really simple lecture and I said

earlier in the first lecture that I was back I was like it

doesn't really matter what you know it matters what you can

show that you know so just looking at the material and

saying yeah I get that isn't gonna get you points on the

exam,

right?

What's gonna get you points on the exam is like, what kind of

question might they ask me to see if I understand the

difference between stacks and queues?

And then write that test question.

Because there's 18,

19,

20,

21 year olds

just like you out there that are writing these questions.

So if you write them,

you get better at thinking in ways to say,

not only do I know this stuff, but I can show how I know this

stuff,

right? Especially if you got somebody that you hang out with,

that you study with in this course, and say, well, I'm gonna

write some questions.

You write some questions. I'll give you my questions.

Maybe they're bad,

but guess what? Some of the questions that we get from our

staff are bad too,

and then we fix them. Or we throw them away,

some of both.

But remember how I said a lot of what happens in this course

depends on something. When you can write a question,

even a bad question,

when you can turn to your partner and say,

the reason why this is a bad question is because you didn't

take into account that you know when this container is empty,

then blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.

Oh yeah, that's right. And now you've just really

learned something. Now you've just really learned

how to show that you know that something.

Does that make sense?

So,

what I did is try to help you with this.

Let's see if we can't get to

all

the stuff that's on my iPad.

PowerPoint, that's what we're really looking for.

So here in containers,

nope, not in. Yeah, that's not what I want,

sorry.

Remember how I was talking about having such a problem with the

fonts?

I went back and fixed a whole bunch of them at least in that

lecture because it was in bad shape so I'll reopen this one

and save it and then pull out your phone because we're gonna

pull a QR code off the screen here in just a second save a

copy on my iPad containers

save and replace

alright All right,

last slide of the fun stuff.

Oh,

nope. I just blew it away, didn't I?

I certainly did.

OK, but it's still out there somewhere.

Still out there.

That's it right there.

All right, scan that thing right there.

You definitely can catch it.

So that's just the link to a Google form.

And this Google Form lets you write a test question.

Pretty simple,

right?

It leads you through,

like,

give the thing a title,

give it something decent.

You know, you can write different types of, you can

write true-false questions. This is just a practice exam.

But what this is gonna let you do is,

like,

if half of you write a test question,

there's gonna be 40 test questions from this lecture

that you can practice, look at, throw out as a group.

Maybe we can work on them and tune them up, throw some away,

say,

here's some good stuff.

I don't want to put too much work into it myself just because

then that's sort of like messing with your process,

but if it needs some cleaning up.

So what I can do is you submit this form and then I've got a

little script that runs and this script will then turn around and

generate a Google Doc that looks just like an exam.

Well,

it looks like an exam and you can then take the exam,

right? So in that thing, you can also pick which lecture it's

from.

So we've been through the lecture, which I think is two on

the list.

This is the containers lecture, and we'll get into the next one,

which is complexity analysis.

So let's keep that link somewhere in your

favorites so I can pause at the end of the lecture and say,

okay, now go write a test question.

and then I'll get this exam back to you once I get it printed up.

I'll post it on Ed here.

And I won't do too much editing on it, like I said, because I

just don't wanna spend a whole bunch of time on it when it

could be doing other things.

You'll get to seeing what you can do and you can't do when you

submit these things.

And then,

like I said,

this is a good way to do it because you can go back and say,

well,

let me think about what 30 other people thought were important

about this lecture,

right? what 50 other people thought was important about this

lecture,

if I can brush up on that,

I'm gonna be in pretty good shape because,

you know,

this is a statistical,

it's not a zero percentage that one of those 30 or 50 other

people who wrote a test question is gonna end up as an IA in this

course in the next semester. And you're like,

okay, well I was taking test questions from that cat before

they were even an IA.

And now I'm good at it. So,

there we go,

I'll pull that up and we can get those things going in there

regularly because that's gonna make you better at the exam.

All right.

Then that puts us right here.

We ended up talking about the deck.

So we'll start up today talking about the priority queue.

So we've called those other containers basic.

That was offensive to them,

but when you're basic,

you're basic. Can't help you.

All right.

This is customizable container because when I put something

into a queue,

it always comes out in the same order.

They take 10 queues and put the same 10 items in those,

same 10 queues are always going to come out in the same order.

Because I can't change the way that a queue behaves.

I can change the way that a priority queue behaves.

Right? That's why we call it customizable.

We can think of a priority queue where we have each piece of

data,

also known as a datum,

each piece of data has both its data and some priority

associated with it. Usually the priorities are

numbers.

Sometimes we can do letters, but really when we're doing letters

we're just comparing letters in a numeric way.

So we really need something numeric to compare these things

with.

And sometimes the data has an explicit priority like this is a

priority one call.

other times you can say well this stock price is here and

that other stock price is there and if I'm trying to buy the one

with the lower price is more important than the one with the

higher price so there's explicit priority and there's implicit

priority but that's how we pull it off we can insert things and

we can look at the thing that's most important and we can remove

a thing it's gonna remove the most important thing so just

like the if you think about the Q was working as importance was

totally based on temporal ordering.

Whoever got there first was always the most important.

Priority Q works pretty similarly except it has nothing

to do with time.

It has to do with this numeric value that you either give or

calculate out of things.

And so you put stuff in there and no matter when you put it in

there,

the most important thing always comes out.

And then once that's gone, the next most important thing is

what comes out, and then the next most important thing, and

so on, until you get down to the least most important, last thing

that's in there, and you take it out.

So this bike race, for instance, is a priority queue.

We dump all the racers in, and then they pop themselves out at

the end with the most important racer being the one who comes

out first.

It's a priority queue.

So here's an example of an emergency call center.

So these operators receive calls, And then when they have

somebody to dispatch, they send them to a call.

We got three levels of call.

We're going to call them a level zero call.

We got like zero minutes to wait to get this.

So let's say that a level zero call is like my house is on

fire. We're going to send somebody as

soon as we got somebody.

A level one call,

let's say I heard a noise downstairs.

There might be someone here.

Please send someone as soon as you can.

Level one,

yes. But turns out it could be could

be the cat cat makes noise. You don't know.

Maybe it's okay So a level two call that's pretty chill though

It is definitely the cat but in this case cats in the tree We

need somebody to come get the cat out of the tree.

Okay, great I'll come get the cat out of tree as long as

somebody doesn't have a home invasion going on or

Is in process of burning to death, right?

That's how level one zero and two all work out So a level two

call comes in. We don't have anybody to

dispatch.

We put them in there.

There's a little kitty in a tree.

Waiting for somebody to get the cat out of the tree.

All right, what happens then?

Another level two call comes in. Now I got two cats,

maybe two trees. It could be the same tree,

nobody knows. We have two calls though,

both about cats.

Level one call comes in. I think there's somebody

downstairs.

The operator says,

sir, are you sure it's not the cat? I don't think it's the cat,

please send somebody.

Okay, we'll send somebody as soon as we can.

So we get a dispatch call and we send somebody out.

Go check out the house.

Turns out guy was safe all along.

It was just a cat.

Level zero call comes in. Now this is a house on fire

because cats like to step on things and chew cords and stuff

like that. Cat probably stopped the fire

because you know you left me in a tree and I was hungry.

I was trying to get some food downstairs in the kitchen.

He sent the police after me.

I'm burning the house down. So house is on fire,

we got a call coming in about house fire, and that's the call

that's going to get dispatched to next.

So this is how a priority queue works.

This was one of the ones we said earlier,

we talked about a container that might handle

a receptionist calls that get interrupted because there's some

calls that are more important than others.

Is there the same priority as a queue?

That's a good question. If they're the same priority,

is it just a queue? In human terms,

you would hope so, right? Because people would get grumpy

otherwise.

But in pure numeric terms,

a level two is a level two is a level two.

If you wanna say,

I also ascribe temporal stuff to this,

like I say,

every two comes in, and then the twos get handled in the order

that they came in,

the ones get handled in the order that they came in, and so

on, that's something that you can do,

right? You can tune these priority queues to do whatever

you like. You can have it just say, well,

if it's a two,

it's a two. I don't care, right? That would

sometimes turn out to be unfair if you always get enough two,

you get more twos than you get dispatches,

you would have a situation where somebody could come in at a two

and never get served,

even though other twos are getting served and other ones

are zeros.

So when you assign how priority gets determined, you have to

make that decision.

Yeah,

whether time matters or not.

When you add it, it would be easier to add it.

Right, well, in this one, it doesn't really show it.

It's like a call gets dispatched because someone came and said,

hey, now we've got a car,

what's most important?

And so at that point, if you look back and say,

right,

here's where we were, and then a car shows up and says, hey,

where should I go to next?

You say, okay, well, in that case, we've got a level of one,

go to that house. So the dispatch takes off

whenever something comes available,

right, a service person comes available.

Can you add more priority balances towards the 20s?

So in the explicit case here where I've got zero,

one, and two levels,

you can add as many priority levels as you want,

explicitly.

In the implicit case, then it's like all bets are off, right? I

got $1 share price. I got $1.10

share price. I got $1.50

share price. The stock goes up.

I got a $400 stock price.

There's a bunch of different priorities in there when you get

to implicit. it when you're at explicit it's

kind of up to you what you choose it to be I mean because

you can think of representing this in memory just almost like

it seems right it looks like a bunch of linked lists or you

could do this into a container a vector of vectors something like

that so in any case you can make this happen I'm just trying to

give you the overall structure of how in explicit priorities

would work all right that's good That's cats.

Gotta watch out for those cats.

I have a collection of feral cats that lives outside of my

house. My wife and the kids feed the

cats,

and there's anywhere from three to six of them that you walk

down, and they're just hanging outside the door,

like,

hand up on the glass,

like,

okay, we'll give you some food.

They just live out there.

Oh,

so the question here is like, is there a way to say if I've been

waiting long enough, there's a way to increase my priority.

With the standard priority queue,

there isn't a way to do that.

Right? Because you can think of the priority queue

doesn't change until you behave on it, right?

When I push something in, That's when I can maybe change the

priorities.

But if I do that, I have to change priority and then

restructure the entire priority queue because I don't know where

you were in the queue when I decided to change your thing.

So a standard priority queue won't really support that very

well.

But it's definitely a thing that happens in systems programming.

You say,

I've got a request that's sitting here, so eventually it

does get upgraded.

You can do that, but this is simpler than that.

Yeah. Each code can only have one

priority valid,

right?

Right.

Yes, so there's only one priority in this system.

Same sort of thing, though. I mean, if you want to get real

tricky, you can have a bunch of different things you can do.

But maybe if you're talking about multiple things that

create your priority,

like if you and I have the same start date,

then maybe then we say,

if they've got the same start date, then the,

I don't know,

something else, their age is what separates them after that.

So there's just like a tie break.

So you can have tie breaks.

In this basic system here, there is no tie breaks.

There's just one priority.

But you could say, and you'll see in,

I don't know if you're doing stocks this semester, but same

sort of thing. If I've got two people coming in

selling the stock at the same price,

then the person who arrived with the sale first is the one who

gets priority,

right?

And so then that's fair to that person because it was like,

well, I was selling that at $1.05

and you want to come in here and sell at $1.05,

I can't ever get my sales off, right?

So yes, you can do that too, all kind of things you can do with

priority queues.

And you will have some fun doing that.

Fun, you'll do it.

Second project,

2B.

So here's a priority queue ADT, it looks pretty similar,

right? It's got a push, it's got a pop, it's got a show me what's

important,

right? We called it front in a queue, We called it top in a

stack.

We're gonna call it top here in a priority queue as well.

It's the most important thing.

It's on the top of the list.

That's how you can think of it.

You'll notice too that this one is const

in that return reference because,

remember the return reference doesn't remove it from the

container.

It just lets you access it.

So,

the reason why it's const is because If you could get a copy

of it while it's still in the container and then change it You

could make it less important, but still at the top of the

priority queue

So you get it as const so you can't really change it You want

to change it? You're gonna have to pop it take it out and deal

with it

All right,

yeah

Okay, so for instance, let's say we're at stock prices again.

Everybody's stock price is what gets you to the most important

thing. I'm trying to buy stock, so I'm

looking for the stock with the lowest price.

Give me the one with the lowest price.

This is $1.05. I was like, well, what if I

change that right now to $4?

Now it's no longer the most important stock,

but since it's sitting at the top of the container, it's still

physically in that same place.

The container says, well,

this is where I keep the most important thing, so the next

time somebody asks for it, they get the $4 price, even though

that's not the best price in the container.

So that's why you're locked out from being able to change it

while it's in the container.

So you get a const reference to it, not a reference where you

can change. Whereas in the stack and queue,

remember, we just got regular references.

So you can say, well, here's the first person in line and all of

a sudden they have less money, but they're still first in line.

It doesn't change, but nothing can change the fact that they

got here before everyone else. So they will always be first in

line, no matter what I do to edit them.

But these I can't edit because I could change where they belong

in the container.

And so that's why it's const.

That's the only difference between this one and the other

two that we looked at, the stack and the queue,

right? I've got a metric,

couple of metrics there, size and empty,

and so on.

So think about hospital queue for arriving patients,

load balancing on servers.

We've got that going on now

on our wonderful auto grader.

Didn't have that for years and years.

We just had students balance.

But this is a priority queue ADT.

It's pretty straightforward.

We can implement this as we've talked about in multiple ways,

and that is what project 2B is all about.

You will be implementing a priority queue.

We'll give you one way fully implemented, and then you'll

implement it three other ways on top of that.

So one way to do this is, what if I had just kept everything

unordered?

Basically, just put my stuff in a bucket.

It would be really easy to put stuff in there.

You just put it in there.

So your insertion time is constant,

but how is it to find it?

Then I've got to do this linear search.

I've got to look through everything.

Which one is the most important?

I don't know until I look at all of them.

So if I go with an unordered sequence as my container, I can

stick stuff in there in constant time, but it's going to take me

linear time to find the most important thing.

So that sorted thing would be a lot better

because then I would know exactly where the thing was, I

could get it out in constant time.

Problem with that is keeping it sorted all along.

If it's sorted,

you should know that you can use a binary search

to figure out where something new goes,

but if I've got a sequential container,

in many cases,

I've gotta then slide stuff out of the way to put that thing

where it actually belongs.

So that's why we say in this case I mean we can always make a

difference here if we went for the doubly linked list you could

insert it in constant time you wouldn't have to move things but

the doubly linked list now I can't do a

logarithmic binary search on it right the only way I can search

a binary a doubly linked list is with a linear search so even if

I use the linked list I could do a linear search to find where it

goes a constant time insertion still takes linear time to

insert the thing.

So we'll say linear insertion time with a sorted sequence,

but then since I got it sorted, I know the most important thing,

it's always at the end.

I just grab it from there.

Boom, so constant time access.

So those two kind of work together,

sorted and unordered,

because they're either linear on the way in or linear on the way

out in constant time otherwise.

We'll talk about heaps later.

Heaps are what we use in the STL.

The STL uses them because they're far better, right?

They're logarithmic on the way in and logarithmic on the way

out.

Yes?

Right,

because with the doubly linked list, you don't have random

access,

right? You have sequential access.

So just quick numbers on logarithmic action.

It's 1,024,

log base 2 of that,

10.

So if I got a heap with 1,000 items in it, it costs me 10

steps to put it in,

10 steps to get it out.

That same priority queue with an unordered sequence container

costs me one step to put it in and 1,000 to get it out.

If I got it sorted, it could be as bad as a 1,000 on insertion

and one on the way out. So you can see why the

round-trip on both of those first two in the 1,000 range

versus the heap in the 10 range,

much better with the heap on both of them.

The round-trip there is still in the 10s.

An array of linked list like we saw with the CAT demo.

That's an array of linked list where I've got some

predetermined set of priorities. That one I can get in constant

time for insertion,

constant time for removal.

Much better.

But that's when I know ahead of time what my priorities are.

Right,

because well there's three levels of priority.

Even if there's 10 levels of priority,

that's a constant.

There's only 10 of them.

Right,

the challenge is when there's 10 levels of priority and there's

40,000 insertions,

I don't want to do a 40,000 item search.

Looking at those 10 and say which one of these 10 things

from top to bottom has something in it that's my most important

item.

So constant time access in constant time access out because

you just say well here's the priority stick that thing in the

list.

So special case there but that's when we have explicit limited

number of priorities.

Yeah.

Well, you can if you know ahead of time all of the priorities

that are available, and they're explicitly listed,

right?

But like in the case of stocks,

you don't know,

there's no limited list of what the prices could be.

Could be a dollar one, could be a dollar two, could be a dollar

three, keep that story going on for hours, right?

And so there's not a specific,

and even if I did, I wouldn't wanna have a list that had

40,000 different heads on it, right? So then the search for

which one of those things actually has a thing in it is

just as bad as doing it another way.

So the explicit concept list thing works, especially when

there's a small number of them. This is controllable and you

know ahead of time.

Good question, right? Because why wouldn't we do that all the

time? Just like we talked about the deck, why wouldn't we use

the deck all the time?

It's not always good all the time.

All right, we call it a customizable container because

by default,

standard priority queue uses the function standard less.

Standard less is just a binary predicate.

It says,

is this first thing less than the second thing?

True or false?

That's what standard less does.

And so,

the standard priority queue says, I'll take any things you

give me and I can repeatedly apply,

is this less, is this less, is this less, is this less, until I

figure out exactly where this thing belongs.

That's how it works.

It applies that function to figure out, hey, you've given me

something new.

I'm going to,

from what I have already and what you've given me, apply this

function to see, hey, are you more important than all of them?

Are you more important than some of them? Are all of them more

important than you?

That's what the Priority Queue does.

And it's customizable because you can change that standard

less function. It uses standard less by

default,

but you can say well, what if I put standard greater in there?

Standard greater would then say okay well sure you've got a

priority queue But now the most important thing isn't the

biggest thing the most important thing is the smallest thing And

I know that's terribly confusing

Because you think why is less give me the big thing and

greater give me the small thing

It's just the way it works.

It's the way it works.

In the STL,

it is in a binary heap.

When you implement your priority queues in Project 2, you will be

using the comparator in a sorted,

in an unordered one,

in a binary heap, and in a pairing heap as well.

But you'll be needing something to say,

how do I decide?

Here's two things that I don't know about at compile time.

Because you can take the containers that you write and

say,

here,

stick in a stock order, or stick in a Jedi troop deployment,

and it will determine which one of these are based on the

functions you give it. It says, well,

when I'm given two Jedi troop deployments,

this is how I know the one that's most important.

That's what that function does.

Yeah.

So in terms of ties,

like we said earlier with the 0-1-2 thing,

that doesn't really worry about ties.

If they're actually the exact same priority,

it's not really deterministic about which one you'll get out.

Because they say, well hey,

they're equally important and you said you wanted the next

Most important thing and they're both tied.

So I gave you something that

You know hit the constraint

Yeah,

so in the priority queues We'll be using a lot of tiebreakers so

that we know that we're getting down to a single most important

thing at least in our projects

All right, so

Back to this greater less thing, right when I say sort a bunch of

numbers. What do you think?

They're gonna end up like one, two, three, four, five, six,

seven, eight, nine, 10, right?

If I said sorted was 10, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four,

you wouldn't argue, like those are sorted,

but they're like reverse sorted, right?

So by default, when I say sort,

you think I'm gonna go increasing,

and that's true.

The standard sort in the STL also uses less,

and so when you sort things, they go in increasing order.

When I say give me the most important number out of this

pile of numbers, what do you think is the most important

number?

It's the biggest one, right?

So that's what it is.

These two things work based on what we as a group think is the

default behavior.

You say priority queue,

by default,

I get the biggest thing.

Perfect. If I say sort,

by default, you go from small to big.

STL is trying to save you work, and it says,

hey, if you've got a custom object and you gotta write these

comparators so people can put them in order and do things with

them,

we only want you to have to write one.

So if you write one that behaves like less,

when you call sort with it,

they go in increasing order, like you expected.

When you put them into a priority queue,

they go from biggest to smallest, like you expected.

That's why less causes the sort to go in the same way and causes

the priority queue to give you the big thing.

You wanna reverse either one of those two, you give greater to

the sort, They go big down you give greater to the PQ they go

small down

Well,

it's it's a boolean function

Right.

The question is if it's using less what happens if they have

the same priority. So the question is is this less

than that?

And if they're the same the answer is no

that's all right and then it makes all the rest of its

decisions based on that and so I say well I can figure out which

one of these is most important because if this is the same as

that then I can certainly tell you that this one is not

more important than that one so I won't return this one before

that one and that's how it works so you can do this and

Obviously,

less is a standard function, so it works really great with

built-in things.

Strings,

integers,

strings aren't built-in, but standard less has been defined

for strings.

So standard less works with integers,

bools,

floats,

doubles,

all your built-in types, and then some of the more common

types like string as well, because standard less is defined

for string.

Now, if you wanna say, well, I've got this stock order,

standard less is not defined for your stock order.

So that's when you have to bring your own comparator and say,

make me a priority queue of the stock orders,

stick them in a vector of stock orders, and use this comparator

to look at two different ones and figure out which one is more

important.

Will standard less work if you have like the overloaded less

than operator? Absolutely, the question is will standard less

work if you overload the operator less than?

And yes it will.

Standard less, we'll try to call operator less than if it exists

for that thing. If it doesn't exist for that

thing,

then it doesn't work.

All right.

So you can always change this,

this priority queue's ability to work by changing the function

that you declare it with.

So it says here at the bottom, custom comparators can work with

objects,

perform tie-breaks on multiple object members like first price,

then arrival time, and other functionality.

Where do we get them from? of course,

not include priority queue.

That's one of the mysteries in my mind of the STL,

but priority queue doesn't come from priority queue header,

it comes from queue.

Somewhat related,

they have similar naming going on there.

That's about four hours ago. So you include queue to get

standard priority queue, and then here we say some common

declarations. What if I just want a maximum

priority queue, the default that uses standard less,

a maximum priority queue of things called T.

You see this declaration right here.

So this one gives me a max priority queue.

Whatever T type is,

less has to work for it,

and then it's going to give me the biggest T first as I pop

them out of my PQ.

If I wanted to change that,

for instance,

bring my own comparator here,

then the declaration is a little bit more complicated.

right the declaration here starts with standard priority

queue then I say it has T's in it then I have to add this

second parameter which says I'm gonna keep my T's in a vector of

T you don't own the vector you can't access the vector

don't even worry about the vector all you're telling the

priority queue is you should stick things in a vector here if

you wanted to customize it you could say hey I want you to make

me a priority queue in a deck don't do that but that's what

that's there for in any priority queue container so for instance

if we wanted to make a stack we said the other day in a deck we

would say I would like a stack of T's held in a deck of T's

that's the default but I could also say I want a stack of T's

held in a vector of T's that's how you would declare it and so

the STL holds its convention such that the first template

parameter is always the type that goes in there.

And if the container is customizable,

that's the second parameter.

So in this case, the priority queue has a customizable

container. You will not customize it.

You should always use vector of t.

But that's what we have to do to get to the third parameter,

which is where we include our comparator.

So this is how I've been able to declare a priority queue.

This case is called myPQ.

It holds T's in a vector, and it uses this comp functor to break

ties when there are ties.

In the sort of, in the documentation of it, or?

I mean, in this one right here, I could say something like

priority Q

of int,

held in a vector of int,

and then use my comp.

Yeah, I can do that. So the T is just for slides,

really.

Anything that you would use, you could actually put in there.

Yeah, when you actually use them,

at templating time, and it's gonna change it to that type.

Yeah.

Mm-hmm. How is the priority queue a CQT?

The default container of a priority queue is that vector,

right? And that's what I'm saying.

If you just say,

like this line right here,

this priority queue T,

it really ends up as T comma vector of T.

You just don't have to put the second parameter if you don't

want to change it. So the default is vector,

leave it at the default.

If you need to schedule a third thing here, then you have to put

the second one there to take the place of.

Yeah.

The comp is a binary predicate that answers true or false to

here's two of these, which one is this first one less important

than the second one?

You could put a different container in there, as long as

it has to have random access.

The good question here seems like,

and it's true because

all the time that we change the comparison.

So the question was,

feel like people would use the comp as a custom thing more

often than they would change the vector.

So why wouldn't they put that one first so we didn't have to

do this three parameter thing even though we only really

wanted to change two things,

what gets held and how the decisions get made,

right?

It's about consistency,

right?

If, like I said,

when you have a templated container that you can change a

container on, like stack can be put in a vector or stack can be

put in a deck,

right?

Q can be put in a deck,

or Q can be put in a list.

That's all I need for those things,

the thing and what it gets held in.

So it can say stack of Ts held in vector of Ts, and I'm done.

And so to stay consistent,

the STL says,

if you're ever going to change the container, that's always the

second parameter. If there's more stuff to be

done, like in the case of the priority queue, it's after that,

because there isn't more stuff to be done in the case of a

stack.

So that's why,

because it leaves it at the part where you can go,

I will do less,

and it will take on the default behavior, and it's good.

So in this priority queue,

all the elements are gonna be the vector,

the underlying vector,

the thing that's gonna be the vector of the element?

You don't really know or care,

right?

They're actually gonna be heap ordered,

and that's what these functions here do, right? actually the

priority queue that's in there uses these functions from

algorithm.

It says,

hey, here's the container,

make a heap out of this container if there's stuff

already in it.

Then if it's at the situation where you can call this,

say I've got a container full of stuff,

make a heap out of it. Now, I want to keep it as a

heap, but I want to put something new in there.

You call push heap on that container and that's all it

does. It takes a vector and uses these

three things to do its work. That's what the STL does.

But these functions do exactly that.

Push something into a heap while maintaining heap ordering.

Remove something from a heap and make sure that the heap isn't

broken when we're done.

So if you want to do a standard priority queue,

you can. If you want to make your own

really customized priority queue, you can play around with

this container.

Really customized,

you could do all the work yourself.

All right.

PQs,

done. This is a good time to think

about a test question.

There was a lot of stuff we talked about in a very few

slides.

Lots of questions.

Think about what's interesting about priority queues.

How do they differ? What if I had a priority queue,

a stack, and a queue, and I didn't know which one was which,

and I started sticking stuff in there.

What would come out?

It would depend on what container I had.

So,

some things there.

So after we get to these sections, I won't have a whole

lot of time to pause for you,

but when you see slides that look like this,

especially if you're taking notes,

scribble that little, just a little hint of a question,

like some thoughts about what a question might be, then turn

around and come back during study time and write a real

multiple choice question for it.

Great place to do it.

All right.

End of the show. So, let's go on to the next,

we'll discard here,

and then we need to download from there.

All right.

This one, I like to make fun of this guy.

Seems like you should be on a TV ad that says binary got

you down are you feeling blue about ones and zeros

all right but not to be insensitive

he looks depressed well that's okay complexity

analysis will depress most of us so if you have real problems

with depression,

you should definitely talk to somebody.

It's terrible.

On the middle here, I've got this stopwatch because we will

be doing some actual measurement of time.

We're trying to figure out what time is going to look like.

And over on the right there,

I don't know, that just is a thing that has a curve that

looks somewhat quadratic. I don't know why that one is

there.

It seems to have nothing else to do with this lecture content.

So,

here we go.

On to complexity analysis.

This one is the tough one.

These questions are really hard to write.

You can't really write nice complexity analysis questions.

They're kinda gotta be a little mean, they're a little tricky,

because it's just really straightforward stuff.

And unless you put a little bit of hiding

what's going on in there, it's just like, oh yeah, that's

obvious.

I don't even have to understand things, I just write stuff down.

So,

what is complexity analysis?

We're gonna take algorithms and some input size, which we'll

always measure with n, to figure out how many steps it's gonna

take to process these n data. We think of each step as taking

a constant amount of time and then we look at as input size

grows How does the number of steps change? It's this trend

that's most important to us How do we measure the complexity?

Well, we want to

Express the rate of growth of the time that this function

takes or the computation takes this f of n And then we'll use

big O notation to figure out what is the order of magnitude

of this f of n The f of n is how much work it takes to process n

data.

Why it's important is it just tells us how an algorithm's

gonna scale when we get larger data.

Given two algorithms, we can say, well, this one is gonna be

better than that one

because it's got a better asymptotic complexity.

We can do that before we implement it.

Because remember,

implementing is coding it up,

debugging it, testing it,

right? That's the time that you don't wanna realize that you've

picked a bad horse,

right? You want to pick the good horse before the race starts.

Not after you figure it out, I'm never gonna catch that guy.

This is terrible.

I go change my jockey shorts,

still not gonna catch him. That's debugging, sorry.

I don't know why changing your shorts is debugging,

but go with me, I'm always on the flow up here.

All right, so we don't want to get into the middle of the race,

though, and figure out, hey, we picked the bad horse.

This is what the complexity analysis will tell us.

This will always be better than that when the size gets big.

So great, I'm going to use the better one first.

That's when I want to spend my time coding,

spend my time testing and debugging,

not working on something that's never going to work for me.

So here's some metrics we'll be looking at best case,

we'll be looking at worst case,

we'll be looking at average case.

So here if I'm looking for something in this container,

you can see that red square represents the best case.

The best case is where I have to do the least amount of work to

find what I'm looking for.

I started looking through this list,

I find that red one there.

What's my worst case?

Worst case is the purple star or the blue oval.

See the purple star isn't there.

How do I know that?

I look at all the things before I realize the purple star right

there.

Same thing here.

I can look at all the things before I find the blue oval.

So those are my two worst cases. It could not even be there.

If you don't know, then you still end up doing a linear

amount of work. You look at all of the things,

right?

The one in It's an over to do n over

2 comparisons The cool thing is in this case the worst case and

the average case are the same asymptotically because here I'm

looking at n and

Thanks here. I'm looking at n over 2 things,

but this is really just n times a constant the constant 1 half

So I've got n at the bottom and n times a constant.

Well, this is n times 1 This is n times 1 half so

asymptotically. They're both linear worst case

linear average case linear

Yes, I think of them in the

This is n.

This is n over 2 correct.

I wasn't even reading. I was just talking

Good though good at it Make sense good.

It's complex analysis. This is not too challenging

stuff

We look at what affects runtime.

Obviously, the algorithm is going to affect things.

After that, we're going to see implementation details.

It says underneath that skills of the programmer.

That's going to be what you're working on here a lot in these

first couple of projects.

Not doing things that gets the job done, it's just really

inefficient.

We don't really work too much on efficiency in CS1 and CS2.

It's time now though.

So we'll learn how to implement things more skillfully, And that

will look that will affect runtime CPU speed and memory

speed of course that gets us into

Copper arms race so if I need a faster computer if I need my

software to run faster Do I just go buy a faster computer?

No, I like that I get better software and I can keep the

really expensive investment down to a minimum though

So we'll try to ignore how CPU speed and memory of speed works

At the auto greater level though So that's exactly how we do

stuff, is measure your clock-on-the-wall time

for how things happen. And so we've got the two

autograder machines that are exactly the same, down to the

same card,

same driver, same everything, so that when you run your software

on one or the other, it doesn't really make a big bit of

difference.

So that's how that works there.

The compiler will change how your stuff runs.

We see a couple of flags here. the minus G3 flag,

the minus G is for debug,

turns on debug information,

which includes extra stuff in your executable,

so debug tools like GDB and LLDB and whatever debugger you wanna

use,

they need to know what's going on while execution happens.

Without debugging information in the executable,

nobody can tell what's happening, it's just executing

some steps.

You put a bunch of information in there, that's where the three

is, That's setting the maximum amount of debug information.

Minus G by itself is the same as G2.

No G is no debug. You can also put a G1 in there

that gives you a little bit of information.

So we'll just go with the maximum amount of debug

information, we'll always put G3 on there.

That doesn't change your runtime so much.

But the minus O flag does though, that's the optimization

for speed.

By default,

dash O is a dash O2,

but O3 is as big as you can go. So you could put any number

there bigger than three if you like.

But three is the last that there is.

So you put minus 0400,

you'll still get level three optimization.

That's going to make your code go as fast as it can.

So the compiler looks at stuff and tries to take shortcuts.

It says, well, this is a really small function.

I can inline that. That'll make things faster.

It does some tricky things there.

So when you're running your code at testing time on your own

machine, you're probably going to use debug builds.

Otherwise, your debugger is not going to be useful for you.

That will be different from a release build when we put the O3

on there.

Isn't there also an OFAS flag?

There is an OFAS flag, but it's probably the same as O3.

That's the fastest we can get.

Other programs running will also affect your runtime.

It happens.

There's one processor,

three programs using it.

They take the process and they share it.

really, really fast, but they share it.

And then lastly, in this big red bullet, it says the amount of

data processed is what's gonna affect the runtime.

That's what we're gonna care about, affecting runtime.

How does the N that we're working on affect us?

So input size versus runtime.

We look at the rate of growth independent of most of the

factors on the previous page. I'm just wondering why the

autograder used time instead of like a blank graph or analyze

it.

How many lines are you expecting it to take?

Ah, that is a long,

long answer.

The question is why do we use time?

Time works.

Time works,

right?

Especially when things started and there was only one

autograder. Everybody's using the same

machine. You all have the same stuff.

We get to multiple autograders, we have so many people,

you get to similar things and they're close enough that they

really are pretty close.

We're in the process of trying to overhaul the thing to look at

the actual number of instructions executed,

cache misses and all that things, because it's not just

executed instructions,

it's what the instructions are doing and how they all shake

out.

So the clock actually still helps do some of that stuff.

All right, so we're looking at what is fast,

always fast. Is it fast on a large input, or

does it get slower? You see here a couple of curves.

That blue one's linear. That red one is approximately

quadratic.

It's definitely a higher-order function of n.

But this is n put size down here,

n on the bottom, and then our time going up there.

These are the kind of graphs that you'll be analyzing when

you're thinking about what's going on with my runtime.

How do we measure input size? That's the next good question.

Is it the number of bits?

Is it the number of bytes? Is it the number of strings?

when you're working on this,

there's two things that are important.

Figuring out what n is,

and then imagining that n is beyond your control and always

very large.

You start trying to do your analysis thinking that you can

control n, you're not really doing complexity analysis.

So,

that's what's going on there.

So what we'll look at is the number of items, do I have an

array of integers,

what's the most important?

How many integers there are,

how many digits there are in each integer, it's going to

depend,

once again it depends,

on what your problem is,

right?

That one string is a several strings is a character in a

string.

So you'll have to figure out what n is before you can get

your analysis done.

Then we'll say, once we know that n is the input size f of n

is the maximum number of steps it takes to process those n

data.

And then the big O of f of n is the complexity class of the

function there. And that's what we're gonna be

looking at as we look at these common complexity classes.

Starting from our fastest at the top,

we've got constant time, big O of one.

And we've got logarithmic time, big O of log n.

Slower than that is linear time.

After that is log linear or linear rhythmic.

That's n log n.

You'll find that in your sorts.

Some priority queue work,

anything that deals with the heap or sorting.

You're going to see n log n.

Quadratic is n squared,

but really quadratic is just a polynomial with its own special

name. So cubic and then to the fourth

and all those things. They're all just polynomials

quadratics faster, though

Exponential factorial doubly exponential that one's there

just for fun. I don't know why but

That's the order of these things so this is a thing that you

should know the tough ones are these two it's always

We ever get stuck. Just give yourself an example.

Well, it was 10 well to the 10th That's about a thousand with 10

times 9 times 8 times 7 times 6. Well, that's bigger

Right, so figure out how to remember these in the right

order can be challenging, but other than that, the rest of

them are pretty straightforward.

But this is the order of functions that we'll be using

throughout the semester to analyze what we got going on,

and we're going to, a lot of times we want to be kind of

right here in this quadratic range.

Quadratic is pretty good,

I mean certainly linear is better, when you get linear you

always take linear if you ever got a chance at constant or

logarithmic you always take the fastest you can get but usually

a lot of times quadratic isn't too bad we'll get into some

later stuff where we're trying to avoid

factorial in project 4 because it's out there so

remember these maybe put that on your sheet here they are all

graphed up next to each other you see this constant time here

in blue at the bottom just stays there then I've got this

logarithmic time in red.

Linear is yellow.

I get to my log linear or linear rhythmic in green here.

That's what sorting looks like.

And then the last two are really, really deceiving.

You look at n squared and two to the n.

It looks like they're friends, right? It looks like they hang

out. They're just crossing each other

and hanging out, they're real close.

But what's n?

It's like five. That is not a real n.

50,000,

that's a real n.

100,000, those are real n's. Remember I said n is so big you

can't control it.

That less than 10 is very controlled.

So,

it looks like two to the n and n squared are about the same.

They are not,

and you know it.

Just don't be fooled by the graph here, right?

Even if I get out to 10,

n squared is 100.

Two to the n is 1,000.

They're not close anymore.

But that's what they look like, so you can see them all snugged

up together.

Here we got a graph.

I said, what is N?

See this graph?

Got these five green dots,

six black edges.

So what is N? Is it the dots?

Is it the vertices in my graph?

Or is it the edges in my graph?

And of course, you know the answer to that already, right?

It depends.

Depends on a few things.

How do I store the data in my graph? Is my graph stored in a

contiguous or is my graph stored connected?

It also depends on what algorithm I'm using.

Some algorithms are vertex-based algorithms.

Other algorithms are edge-based algorithms.

So you have to know what you're doing to figure out what n is.

So,

and we'll get into graph algorithms in the second half,

but we'll see some examples here like e log v, the number of

edges

times the log of the number of vertices, or e times v, or v

squared log e. These are all real

complexities based on graphs, but you have to know what n

is when you're going at trying to do some complexity analysis.

So we'll think of our algorithm analysis

as being independent of the hardware,

because we can, like I said, we can always just get better

hardware if it's bad,

so that's not really a good measure of whether I've got good

software if I've got to get better hardware to make it work.

We'll say, well, I can compile things equally, so I don't want

to worry about that,

or implementation tweaks, getting stuff just right.

What really is going to be important is,

when I've got large enough inputs,

how does it work?

N squared time algorithms will take longer than N algorithms.

Quadratic takes longer than linear.

Constants often get ignored because we're doing this

asymptotic complexity.

In the long run, It doesn't really matter.

5n squared is always going to be worse than 100n.

n gets big enough.

That's why we ignore the constants.

Complexity analysis,

great place to pause.

Jotted a note down right here.

Maybe even a question that you still have.

How do I turn that question into a test question?

We talked about step counting,

number of steps it takes to process some input.

So let's work on step counting.

What counts as one step in a program? This is a very

simplified approach to complexity analysis.

It works,

it's our lowest level base case. After we get into this a ways,

we won't step count. But to get things started,

we will.

Right, so we'll think of these primitive operations as each one

of them taking the same amount of time, or one step.

If you know anything about how processors work, you know that

they don't all take the same amount of time.

They're pretty close, but like I said, doesn't matter.

We're not worrying about that. Right now, we're just gonna

count individual steps,

meaning a variable assignment,

any arithmetic operation,

a comparison,

getting something out of an array or dereferencing a

pointer,

making a function call or getting a function return in

both cases,

ignoring the data that's used with them.

So that's the six simple things that we can look at as steps we

think like it says the runtime of one step is independent so if

i have a step that takes me this long so what i'm saying is if

i've got to add two numbers the add operation takes this amount

of time if i've got to add 500 numbers the add operation still

takes the same amount of time just 500 times so the amount of

data that i have doesn't change the speed of any one step

all right we'll see in the end that it's really the loops that

matter so we're gonna start by learning how to count a for

loop.

We know what a for loop looks like here, right? We got a for

loop.

I say something like i is equal to zero,

i is less than size,

plus plus i.

That's how we write a lot of for loops.

That's my favorite kind of for loop.

They look nice. I can look at them right like

that. I know what's going on.

You get tricky stuff in there with funky math and other than

plus pluses,

then I have to spend more time. But if I see a zero less than

size plus plus, I know right away,

this is an n base loop and n is size.

So, that's what our common for loops look like.

We need to learn how to count for loops though.

So I can say when I set i equal to zero,

that is what?

A variable assignment.

That's one step.

How about this question here? Is i less than size? However, I got

size.

Let's just put it there like that.

We'll call that one step. It's just what,

a comparison.

So I say is i less than size though, how many times does that

happen?

It happens and it works size times.

Works at zero,

works at one, works at two, works at three,

works at four.

I'm going up to five of them.

It works at zero, works at one, works at two, works at three,

works at four.

Five times it works.

But then it gets called one more time so that it fails.

That's how I get out of the loop.

So finally at the point when I is five,

that's when it quits.

So I can say that this size comparison happens n plus

one times.

The initialization is one,

the test is n plus one, and then every time that I'm in the loop,

I get done and I do the update step.

So the update steps has me starting at zero, And then I go

plus,

plus,

plus,

plus, plus,

plus,

plus,

plus,

hey, it's five now, we're out.

So my update happens n times.

So I look at a for loop.

How many steps does the for loop take?

It takes one for initialization,

n for the testing,

plus one for the failed test,

and then n for the update. So I think of them as taking two

n plus two steps

for the for loop,

just the loop,

nothing inside of it.

If I had a for loop that did nothing,

it would still take me two n plus two steps to get that done.

Yeah, waving our hands at some stuff.

The question is, isn't calling size doing something that's a

function call? Yeah, it is. but I could also have that just

be some constant number too right like in the case of dot

size on a vector that returns in constant time so yes it's a

function but it's a constant time function so that really

behaves just like a step

The auto grader ends up taking your big O by running tests and

clocking them, right? It doesn't look at steps, right? Your

analysis at the step level is going to be for you.

The auto grader is not quite that mean.

Yeah,

it's mean enough.

Yeah.

Oh, man, you're so tricky,

you're so tricky,

you're so tricky,

it's true.

Question is,

isn't plus plus i two steps,

because I'm doing an i and I add a number to it and then I assign

it back to i.

So yes,

the answer to that is yes. What does that do though?

That changes this from two N plus two steps

to three N plus two steps.

And what does that do in terms of big O?

Nothing,

right?

It's still linear.

Two N plus two

is big O N.

Three N plus two is big O N. So yeah, we got some hand waving

going on all through this step counter.

It's like,

that's close enough,

I'm waving my hands.

So for now, we're going to leave it at that.

But you'll see why real quick.

We can change it to what you had.

Well,

that's now we're not seeing how we're getting into the one step,

the plus plus i can mutated in memory.

But I mean, it still has to do an operation.

It can be done in one. it can be done in one

instruction,

right? It can be done in one instruction.

So that's why, that's why we have our hands.

We say that's close enough, because two n plus two is close

enough to three n plus two. That's close enough.

We're getting into the finer points here.

So now look at these two functions.

First one is named func one.

I've got some numbers next to it.

Int sum equals zero. That's an assignment, I'll call

that one step.

Line three, I've got a for loop. We already decided if that's

going up to n, then I'm gonna have two n plus two steps for

the for loop itself.

Inside that loop, let's say this sum plus equals i takes one

step.

Let's say that it does.

Takes one step,

but you see it's inside the loop and it's indented over here in

my count as well.

It's inside the loop that happens n times,

so really that one step,

sum plus equals i happens n times,

so I'm gonna say that it contributes n to my overall work

there.

And then lastly, when I return sum,

that takes one step. So if you add those things up in

lines 2 3 4 5 & 6, it looks like 3n plus 4

That's a linear function That's what step counting will do for

me. What's going on here? I got this

other one in func 2 I've got a for loop in line 10 takes 2n

plus 2 steps. I've got a for loop in line 11

also 2n plus 2 steps but that for loop inside

happens n times.

So you can think of this really as being n times 2n plus 2

steps.

That's how much that inner for loop contributes just like this

one step sum plus plus it's one step but it's doubly indented so

it's gonna happen n times for its inner loop and that inner

loop happens n times so that's gonna add a full-on n squared to

the gang right so this looks kind like that that's how when

you add all of this up you'll end up with something that looks

like and see I could have done that here call this and call

this and then when I put all of this into a pile here you'll see

that I get something looks like 3n squared plus 7n plus 6 so I

can say that this first function is linear and a second function

is quadratic

you will

not be asked to count steps,

no.

You can count steps if it's how you get to the big O,

right, because if you can't figure it out, counting steps

will get you the big O.

Good news is,

we're not gonna do that.

We're gonna start recognizing patterns here, right? I see in

that first one,

there's a constant amount of work that's happening inside of

the for loop,

and it's an n-based loop,

therefore I've got an n function,

that's all,

right? Counting steps will get me that but when I get better at

I say well Here's an end loop inside of an end loop that's

looking like n squared and that's way worse than all of

this So I can just ignore this stuff and say it's n squared

because of that and I would be right

So step counting is a way to explain it and a way to get

there when you don't understand something that's going on But we

won't ask you a pure step counting question on the exam.

We will be asking you. What is the complexity of such?

Alright so those are polynomial ones

Here's a logarithmic one.

Welcome to the worst,

the first bad for loop of the semester, right?

Like I said, I like them to start at zero, go less than

size,

and plus plus to get there.

This one does none of that.

None of that.

So when I look at that for loop, I say, I've got to scratch my

head and really pay attention. I might have to write something

down to figure out how many times this loop goes.

Turns out this is a logarithmic loop.

It's looking at some n,

and as long as n is greater than one, I'm gonna divide it in

half.

So I cut it in half, and I cut it in half, and I cut it in

half, and I cut it in half,

and that's what's being illustrated here with this big

yellow bar. There's n items,

and I cut it in half,

and then I cut it in half, and I keep cutting in half until I get

down to one item and that's when I stop.

How many times did I cut it in half?

K times.

Well, what the heck's K,

right?

We feed K back in there and say, well, if I started at one and I

doubled it and I doubled it and I doubled it and I doubled it, I

doubled it, K times, the number I would have was two to the K.

Great,

well, two to the K would be N then or something just like it.

So now that I know that two to the K is N,

I can figure out how to solve for K.

Take the log base two of both sides of that.

So log base 2 of 2 to the k is equal to the

log base 2 of n.

And this is just k log base 2 of n.

So k is how many times the loop goes.

So this is where my solution comes from.

k is log base 2 of n. So that loop up there happens k

times,

not n times.

And you see that the rest of this stuff here is updated

accordingly.

Where previously we said it was two n plus two.

Now we're talking about two k plus two in the case of k being

approximately log n.

All right?

Now,

yeah, go for it.

Because,

for instance, let me start at something like 12, right? I cut

that in half, I go to six, cut that in half, I go to three, cut

that in half.

I go to one, cut that, and I'm done, right?

Then if I turn around and exponent my way back up to that,

one,

then I go to the two, then I go to the four, then I go to the

eight, and then I go to the 16.

And 16 is not 12.

I started at 12, divided to get down there, and I squared to get

back up, and I got up farther. So that's why it's approximately

log n, because when we get to numbers that aren't exactly

perfect powers of two, then we still got to get something close

all right let's make life a little

easier here's a couple of examples on the left I've got

something that looks like some thing that counts the binary log

of a number here rounds up so while n is greater than 1

and divide by equal 2 plus plus R so you You can look at what's

going on inside of that loop.

No matter how many steps you want to say that is,

you can say n div equals two is two steps.

You could also say n div equal two doesn't compile.

Okay, now it does.

You say n div equal two is two steps if you want,

and you could say r++ is even two steps if you want.

You could say it's one step, you could say it's two.

Whatever. But what happens is,

if that loop goes 500,000 times,

those two lines will still take the same amount of time.

So that's what I say. There's a constant amount of

work inside the loop. It doesn't change.

If n grows,

n divided by two doesn't take longer.

It still takes the same amount of time.

Yes,

yes, n does have a size here, but I'm trying to figure out

what's controlling it. The work inside the loop doesn't

change,

right? So then I can say, well,

if the work inside is constant, I see the return statement is

constant,

I see the initial r equals zero is constant, the only thing that

would dictate my complexity of this function is how many times

does that loop go?

That's what I'm trying to figure out.

Otherwise, it's a constant function.

Same thing over here, what's going on? This one says while

high is greater than or equal to low,

now this one is binary search. You know how binary search

works?

We're looking for a thing in this sort of container.

I look in the middle.

If this is it, I'm good. If it's not it,

then what I'm looking for is either over here on the big side

or it's over there on the small side.

And so then I just divide and then go over there and then jump

in the middle of that.

That's what binary search does.

This is how you look things up in a dictionary.

I turn too far, I go back this way.

Not enough, I go that way. We've been binary searching

since we were in

second or third grade.

But this is one written for C++.

So I'm going to pass in some pointer to integers.

This is where the integers begin,

and high is where the integers end.

Just pass it.

And then val is what I'm looking for.

So this little function here says, so if you look at it,

what's going on in there? From a complexity standpoint,

you can put a whole bunch of step counts on all of this

stuff.

But from a high level, you can see,

well,

I return,

and that's constant, and so I don't even have to worry about

that.

The only thing else I have going on in this function is this one

big loop.

So if I figure out how long that loop goes,

I got my answer.

All right?

Okay, that one's off by three minutes.

We're in good shape.

So how long do I stay in as long as high is greater than or equal

to low? Great.

How do high and low get modified? High or low?

So I look in there, I see,

when I'm scanning theorem, I say,

well, those two keyed me in. Let's see how they get modified.

And I look down at 17, I say, well, here's where high gets

modified.

I can find 19 and say, well, here's where low gets modified.

So how do these things happen?

They both use mid.

Well, where's mid?

Mid comes from up there. You see, mid is this calculation

that says, what's the difference between these two?

And then give me the middle.

So it's finding the middle. It's cutting it in half.

So that's what's going on there.

And these two are both logarithmic

because of that cutting in half, right? and that's where my big

speed up is coming in for you.

If your loop has plus plus or minus minus,

it's probably linear.

Because it's looking at this thing and then the thing right

next to it and then the thing right next to it and the thing

right next to it.

If your loop has divide by two or multiply by two or bigger

numbers,

probably logarithmic.

That's where I start and then I have to verify.

Because if I'm dividing by two, I'm taking the data, cutting in

half, and cutting in half, and cutting in half.

Or maybe my counter is like multiplying by two, and then

multiplying by two, and then multiplying by two.

Those are what cause logarithmic behavior.

So as you look through your loops,

if you see some division going on there controlling it,

that's controlling division. This division by two here

controls mid,

which is who updates high and low.

Over here, this division,

I got a plus plus,

But the plus plus doesn't control my loop.

What controls my loop is n and n is being divided by two.

So when the division controls the loop, then you're looking at

something that could be logarithmic.

So there's how we go from step counting to pattern recognition

right away. And then we can go one step

further and say,

hey, you know what? This function has a binary search in

there. I'm like, well, that's log n,

done. I already know the name of

binary search. I don't have to count the steps.

I don't even have to look at the loops.

Binary search is log n. So we'll go from step counting

to, oh yeah, I see two loops nested and I can measure this

loop and that loop and multiply and get my answer.

Like there's a logarithmic loop inside a linear loop, that's n

times log n,

done.

You can count steps,

you recognize patterns,

and then you can start putting names on things as well.

All right. So here's our quick algorithm

exercise.

Yeah,

a minute or two to get this done.

This is what I've got. I've got some input here and

then what my out looks like is it looks at each location as

long as I is not equal to J then I multiply those things together

so in this first position I can say I'm not going to multiply

the three in there so this is just one times two in the second

position I'm not going to multiply the ones was just three

times two and the third position I'm going to multiply the two so

it's just three times one so that's what this function

generates see how that works you look at the code it says it sets

out I equal to one and then multiplies by all the other ones

just not when I is equal to J right when I is equal to J we

don't multiply that so I'll start with one not multiply by

one but not multiply by three multiply by one multiply two get

that so that's how it works how many multiplications happen when

size is n that's the question

Where does multiplication occur?

It occurs inside the nested loop, right?

So think this outer loop is an n-based loop,

where n is size.

Inner loop is an n-based loop, where n equals size.

And if this was all by itself, I would say it would happen n

squared times.

But this thing says when they're equal, which happens once per

loop,

n times,

don't.

So the answer here then is n squared

minus n multiplications happen. So if I look at this function as

you might expect with nested for loops.

This is a big O and

squared

algorithm

All right

This version of it's a little bit cleaner because somebody

said you know what if I just multiply all of those things

once

Then all I have to do is divide things out So I I got two loops

that are for loops of size N, but they're not nested anymore

So the first one multiplies everything into one big chunk,

and then you divide things out on each location So I got all

three times two times one I divide out the three for this

divide out the one for that divide out the two for that I

got the answer. So that's what this one does

same work

Completely different complexity case right because this is a big

O and loop and this is the big O and loop So the whole thing is

big O and we'll talk about the bugs in this function when I see

you next

Okay, walk out of here smiling.

Yeah.

With the priority queue,

what was that note slide where you showed it being an unordered

sequence and an ordered sequence,

and they had a constant linear coefficient.

In that case,

was that different from the linked list kind of example that

you showed where you assigned?

Yes, it's different.

Because those were sort of implicit or like open-ended

priorities,

so even with even with a

fixed set of priorities as i said there's only zeros ones

twos and threes and i stick them all into a container i still

have to look until i find the zeros right it could be the case

i have no zeros in there so really what i'm looking for is a

one and i won't know that so i i could find a one in the first

position and wouldn't know that's my most important thing

till i got all over the internet there's there's no zeros,

that one was it. So it's still the case, even

with that structure of having the predetermined priorities.

So in the ordered sequence,

there was no predetermined priorities and they were just

getting some error by,

like a new error in the base?

Yes,

yeah.

Okay,

so that's like basically a sorted array, sorted list? Yeah,

yeah.

Okay, and then with the binary search algorithm You showed that

it was like the I was one past the N.

If the I was inclusive,

how would that change the algorithm?

It wouldn't change the complexity at all, it would just

make it a lot.

The math one is a bit more complex.

Yeah, how does the math change?

Because then you have to do the plus one minus one thing.

Okay, so you just have to keep the same and it's inclusive.

Yeah, it's faster this way because we don't have to do a

puzzle in my world.

I have a question about the generating section that I just

covered.

Yeah, we skipped it because we don't use it until Project 4 and

it just slows us down. So we'll come back to it.

I was going to ask a question about it.

Sure, absolutely.

So,

you asked in the video what the difference between the

implementation of generating permutations Is versus the

standard library next permutations,

but I don't think that was ever answered.

I was just wanting to confirm The implementation on the slides

to use it personally, but the ones in next permutations